---
title: Access Control
---

# Access Control

## Slide 1

Access Control

1

---

## Slide 2

2

Access Control: the process of authenticating, authorizing and auditing users, groups, and computers to access objects on the network or computer. 
Key concepts that make up access control are;
Permissions, 
User or Group Rights,
Ownership of objects, 
Inheritance of permissions, and 
Object auditing.

Applies to
Windows 10\11
Windows Server

---

## Slide 3

3

Windows can control the use of system and network resources through mechanisms of authentication, authorization and auditing (AAA). 
Authentication can be accomplished with an Account (Username) &
Something you know, e.g. a password or PIN
Something you have, such as a smart phone app that verifies your identity
Something you are, e.g. your face, fingerprint or voice scans
Something you do, e.g. swipe a touchscreen in a pattern
Or a combination of the above = multi-factor authentication (MFA)

---

## Slide 4

4

---

## Slide 5

5

After the first phase, where a user is authenticated, the Windows operating system uses built-in authorization and access control technologies to implement the second phase of protecting resources: determining if an authenticated user has the correct permissions to access a resource.

---

## Slide 6

6

In the access control model, users and groups are represented by unique security identifiers (SIDs). They are assigned rights and permissions that inform the operating system what each user and group can do. 
Each resource has an owner who grants permissions to security principals (users and groups). 
During the access control check, these permissions are examined to determine which security principals can access the resource and how they can access it.

---

## Slide 7

ACCESS TOKENS
When a user logs on, the system authenticates the user's account name and password. If the logon is successful, the system creates an access token. Every process executed on behalf of this user will have a copy of this access token. The access token contains security identifiers that identify the user's account and any group accounts to which the user belongs. 
The token also contains a list of the privileges held by the user or the user's groups. The system uses this token to identify the associated user when a process tries to access a securable object or perform a system administration task that requires privileges.

7

---

## Slide 8

8

Security Principals (ie. Users/groups) perform actions (which include Read, Write, Modify, or Full control) on objects. 
Objects include files, folders, printers, registry keys, and Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS) objects. 
Shared resources use access control lists (ACLs) to assign permissions.

---

## Slide 9

9

Resource managers can enforce access control in the following ways:
Deny access to unauthorized users and groups
Set well-defined limits on the access that is provided to authorized users and groups

---

## Slide 10

10

Object owners generally grant permissions to security groups rather than to individual users. Users and computers that are added to existing groups inherit the permissions of that group.

---

## Slide 11

11

A container is an object (such as a folder) that can hold other objects (such as subfolders and files). 
In a hierarchy of objects, the relationship between a container and its content is expressed by referring to the container as the parent. An object in the container is referred to as the child. 
The child inherits the access control settings of the parent. 
Object owners often define permissions for container objects, rather than individual child objects, to ease access control management.

---

## Slide 12

12

Practical Applications

Protect a greater number and variety of network resources from misuse.
Provision users and groups (of users) to access resources in a manner that is consistent with organizational policies and the requirements of their jobs.
Enable users to access resources from a variety of devices in numerous locations.
Update users’ ability to access resources on a regular basis as an organization’s policies change or as users’ jobs change.
Account for a growing number of use scenarios (such as access from remote locations or from a rapidly expanding variety of devices, such as tablet computers and mobile phones).
Identify and resolve access issues when legitimate users are unable to access resources that they need to perform their jobs.

---

## Slide 13

13

Permissions

Permissions define the type of access that is granted to a user or group for an object or object property. 
For example, the Finance group can be granted Read and Write permissions for a file named Payroll.dat.

---

## Slide 14

14

Permissions

Some permissions are common to most types of objects. These common permissions are:
Read
Modify
Change owner
Delete

---

## Slide 15

15

Ownership of objects

An owner is assigned to an object when that object is created. 
By default, the owner is the creator of the object. No matter what permissions are set on an object, the owner of the object can always change the permissions.  
Is it possible to change the owner?  ……..

---

## Slide 16

16

Inheritance of permissions

Inheritance allows administrators to easily assign and manage permissions. 
This feature automatically causes objects within a container to inherit all the inheritable permissions of that container. 
For example, the files within a folder inherit the permissions of the folder. Only permissions marked to be inherited will be inherited.

---

## Slide 17

17

User rights

User rights grant specific privileges and sign-in rights to users and groups in your computing environment. 
Administrators can assign specific rights to group accounts or to individual user accounts. These rights authorize users to perform specific actions, such as signing into a system interactively or backing up files and directories.

---

## Slide 18

18

User rights

User rights are different from permissions because user rights apply to user accounts, and permissions are associated with objects. 
Although user rights can apply to individual user accounts, user rights are best administered on a group account basis. 
There is no support in the access control user interface to grant user rights. However, user rights assignment can be administered through Local Security Settings  (secpol.msc)

---

## Slide 19

19

Object auditing

With administrator's rights, you can;
audit users' successful or failed access to objects
select which object access to audit by using the access control user interface, 
But first, you must enable the audit policy by selecting Audit object access under Local Policies in Local Security Settings. Important: by default, there is NO object auditing.
You can then view these security-related events in the Security log in Event Viewer.

---

