---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

Week 7
1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 7

In this session we will be investigating the following:

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

1. The Security Onion and Security Artichoke

3

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserve

The Security Onion and Security Artichoke(What cyber security people think they have Vs what cyber criminals face)
A common analogy used to describe a defense-in-depth approach is called “the security onion.” A threat actor would have to peel away at a network’s defenses layer by layer in a manner similar to peeling an onion. Only after penetrating each layer would the threat actor reach the target data or system.

4

d. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

The Security Onion and Security Artichoke

5

Only after penetrating each layer would the threat actor reach the target data or system.
The security onion described on this page is a way of visualizing defense-in-depth.
This is different from the Security Onion suite of network security tools.

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

The changing landscape of networking, such as the evolution of borderless networks, has changed this analogy to the “security artichoke”.
This model benefits threat actors because they no longer have to peel away each layer.

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

6

Security Artichoke(Cyber criminal’s view)

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

The threat actor simply needs to remove certain “artichoke leaves.”
The threat actor peels away the security armor along the perimeter to get to the “heart” of the enterprise.

7

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Security Artichoke

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

2. Security Testing Tools

3

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

Security Testing Tools

Ethical hacking involves using different types of tools to test the network and end devices to validate the security of the network.
Penetration (pen) testing uses hacker techniques and tools to evaluate the strength of network security measures.

8

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

Security Testing Tools

Cybersecurity personnel must know how to use these tools when performing network penetration tests.

9

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

Security Testing Tools

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

10

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

Security Testing Tools (Cont.)

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

11

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

Security Tools, Platforms, and Services

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Security Testing Tools (Cont.)

12

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

3. Security Platforms and Services

3

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

Security Tools, Platforms, and Services

Data Security Platforms

Data Security Platforms (DSP) are an integrated security solution that combines traditionally independent tools into a suite of tools that are made to work together. Security tools that protect and monitor networks are often made by different vendors. It can be difficult to integrate these tools in such a way that a single view of network security can be achieved.

13

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

One such DSP is the Helix platform from FireEye. FireEye Helix is a cloud-based security operations platform that enables organizations to integrate many security functionalities into a single platform. 
Helix provides 
event management, 
network behavior analytics, 
advanced threat detection, and 
incident security orchestration, automation, and response (SOAR) for response to threats as they are detected.

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Security Tools, Platforms, and Services

Data Security Platforms (Cont.)

14

Another integrated DSP is Cisco SecureX. 
The Cisco Secure portfolio consists of a broad set of technologies that function as a team - providing interoperability with the security infrastructure, including third-party technologies. This results in unified visibility, automation, and stronger defenses. The Cisco SecureX platform works with diverse products that combine to safeguard your network, users and endpoints, cloud edge, and applications. SecureX functionality is built in to a large and diverse portfolio of Cisco security products including
next-generation firewalls, 
VPN, 
network analytics, 
identity service engine, 
advanced malware protection (AMP), and 
many other systems that work to secure all aspects of a network. 
SecureX also integrates a range of third-party security tools.

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

Security Tools, Platforms, and Services

Cisco SecureX - Demo (youtube.com) 5 minute

15

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Security Tools, Platforms, and Services

Security Services

Threat intelligence and security services allow the exchange of threat information such as vulnerabilities, indicators of compromise (IOC), and mitigation techniques. As threats emerge, threat intelligence services create and distribute firewall rules and IOCs to the devices that have subscribed to the service.

One such service is the Cisco Talos Threat Intelligence Group. Talos is one of the largest commercial threat intelligence teams in the world. The goal of Talos is to help protect enterprise users, data, and infrastructure from active adversaries. The Talos team collects information about active, existing, and emerging threats. Talos then provides comprehensive protection against these attacks and malware to its subscribers.

Cisco Security products can use Talos threat intelligence in real time to provide fast and effective security solutions.

16

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

4. Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

17

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Defending the Network

Constant vigilance and ongoing education are required to defend your network against attack. The following are best practices for securing a network:
Develop a written security policy for the company.
Educate employees about the risks of social engineering, and develop strategies to validate identities over the phone, via email, or in person.
Control physical access to systems.
Use strong passwords and change them often.
Encrypt and password-protect sensitive data.
Implement security hardware and software such as firewalls, IPSs, virtual private network (VPN) devices, antivirus software, and content filtering.
Perform backups and test the backed-up files on a regular basis.
Shut down unnecessary services and ports.
Keep patches up-to-date by installing them weekly or daily, if possible, to prevent buffer overflow and privilege escalation attacks.
Perform security audits to test the network.

18

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Mitigating Malware

Malware, including viruses, worms, and Trojan horses, can cause serious problems on networks and end devices. Network administrators have several means of mitigating these attacks.

Antivirus software helps prevent hosts from getting infected and spreading malicious code. Several companies that create antivirus software, such as Symantec, McAfee, and Trend Micro. Antivirus products have update automation options so that new virus definitions and new software updates can be downloaded automatically or on demand. This practice is the most critical requirement for keeping a network free of viruses and should be formalized in a network security policy.

These products are installed on computers and servers to detect and eliminate viruses. However, they do not prevent viruses from entering the network. 

Another way to mitigate malware threats is to prevent malware files from entering the network at all. Security devices at the network perimeter can identify known malware files based on their indictors of compromise. The files can be removed from the incoming data stream before they can cause an incident.

19

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Mitigating Malware (cont)

Antivirus software is made up of several components
Virus scanner and firewall – included now in every antivirus software
 These are resident components, loading into system memory (RAM) at startup and remaining active for the session. 
 Signature-based detection – relies on matching hash signatures of files against downloaded lists of known malware hash signatures. Requires updated signature files are installed before scanning. Some scanning engines will scan the most vulnerable areas of a storage drive and not the entire drive (fast scans).Web-based scanners don't need to have the signature downloaded first.
 Heuristic-based detection – scores files according to the component behaviour of the files, e.g. if they contain delete commands or data export components. If the score is above a particular score, the file will be flagged as potentially dangerous and might be quarantined. Heuristic-based scans may take several hours to complete.
 Root-Kit detection – looks to see if file will attempt to load into memory area reserved for the OS Kernel and whether it has a valid security certificate.
Phishing filter – to protect against phishing attacks
Automatic updater – for both the malware definitions and for search engine updates.
Web shield – scans transferring data and programs when browning online, prevents malware being downloaded and run.

19

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Mitigating Worms

Worms are more network-based than viruses. Worm mitigation requires diligence and coordination on the part of network security professionals. The response to a worm attack can be broken down into four phases: containment, inoculation, quarantine, and treatment.

20

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Mitigating Reconnaissance Attacks

Reconnaissance attacks are typically the precursor to other attacks that are designed to gain unauthorized access to a network or disrupt network functionality. You can detect when a reconnaissance attack is underway by receiving notifications from preconfigured alarms. These alarms are triggered when certain parameters are exceeded, such as the number of ICMP requests per second. Reconnaissance attacks can be mitigated in several ways, including the following:

Implementing authentication to ensure proper access.
Using encryption to render packet sniffer attacks useless.
Using anti-sniffer tools to detect packet sniffer attacks.
Implementing a switched infrastructure.
Using a firewall and IPS.

It is impossible to mitigate port scanning. Using an IPS and firewall can limit the information that can be discovered with a port scanner. Ping sweeps can be stopped if ICMP echo and echo-reply are turned off on edge routers; however, when these services are turned off, network diagnostic data is lost.

21

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Mitigating Access Attacks

Several techniques are available for mitigating access attacks, including 
strong password security, 
principle of minimum trust, 
cryptography, and 
applying operating system and application patches. 

A surprising number of access attacks are carried out through simple password guessing or brute-force dictionary attacks against passwords. To defend against this, create and enforce a strong authentication policy which includes:
Use strong passwords - Strong passwords are at least eight characters and contain uppercase letters, lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters.
Disable accounts after a specified number of unsuccessful logins has occurred - This
practice helps to prevent continuous password attempts.

Use encryption for remote access to a network and routing protocol traffic to reduce the possibility of man-in-the-middle attacks. Educate employees about the risks of social engineering, and develop strategies to validate identities over the phone, via email, or in person. Multifactor authentication (MFA) has become increasingly common.

22

---

## Slide 26

OFFICIAL

Mitigating Common Network Attacks

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Mitigating DoS Attacks

One of the first signs of a DoS attack is a large number of user complaints about unavailable resources or unusually slow network performance. A network utilization graph showing unusual activity could indicate a DoS attack. To minimize the number of attacks, a network utilization software package should be running at all times.

Historically, many DoS attacks were sourced from spoofed addresses. 

Cisco routers and switches support many antispoofing technologies, such as 
Port security, 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) snooping, 
IP Source Guard, 
Dynamic Address Resolution Protocol (DARP) Inspection, and 
Access Control Llists (ACLs).

23

---

## Slide 27

OFFICIAL

5. Network Foundation Protection Framework

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

24

---

## Slide 28

OFFICIAL

Cisco Network Foundation Protection Framework

NFP Framework

The Cisco Network Foundation Protection (NFP) framework provides comprehensive guidelines for protecting the network infrastructure. 

These guidelines form the foundation for continuous delivery of service. NFP logically divides routers and switches into three functional areas:
Control plane - Responsible for
routing data correctly.
Management plane - Responsible for managing network elements.
Data plane - Responsible for forwarding data.

25

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

---

## Slide 29

OFFICIAL

Cisco Network Foundation Protection Framework

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Securing the Control Plane

Control plane traffic consists of device-generated packets required for the operation of the network itself. Control plane security can be implemented using the following features:
Routing protocol authentication - Routing protocol authentication, or neighbor authentication, prevents a router from accepting fraudulent routing updates.
Control Plane Policing (CoPP) - CoPP is a Cisco IOS* feature that lets users control the flow of traffic that is handled by the route processor of a network device.
AutoSecure - This can lock down the management plane functions and the forwarding plane services and functions of a router.

CoPP is designed to prevent unnecessary traffic from overwhelming the route processor. The CoPP feature treats the control plane as a separate entity with its own ingress (input)
and egress (output) ports. A set of rules can be established and associated with the ingress and egress ports of the control plane.

* Cisco IOS is an example of the many propriety operating systems used in network devices such as routers and switches.

26

---

## Slide 30

OFFICIAL

Cisco Network Foundation Protection Framework

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Securing the Management Plane

Management plane traffic is generated either by network devices or network management stations using processes and protocols such as Telnet, SSH, and TFTP, etc. The management plane is a very attractive target to hackers.

Management plane security can be implemented using the following features:
Login and password policy - Restricts device accessibility.
Present legal notification - Displays legal notices.
Ensure the confidentiality of data - Protects locally stored sensitive data from being viewed or copied. Uses management protocols with strong authentication to mitigate
confidentiality attacks aimed at exposing passwords and device configurations.
Role-based access control (RBAC) - Ensures access is only granted to authenticated users, groups, and services.
Authorize actions - Restricts the actions and views that are permitted by any particular user, group, or service.
Enable management access reporting - Logs and accounts for all access.

27

---

## Slide 31

OFFICIAL

Cisco Network Foundation Protection Framework

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Securing the Data Plane

Data plane traffic consists mostly of user packets being forwarded through the router. 
Data plane security can be implemented using 
Access Control Lists (ACLs), 
antispoofing mechanisms, and 
Layer 2 security features. 

ACLs are used to secure the data plane in a variety of ways:
Blocking unwanted traffic or users
Reducing the chance of DoS
Mitigating spoofing attacks.
Providing bandwidth control
Classifying traffic to protect the Management and Control planes

Cisco Catalyst switches can use integrated features to help secure the Layer 2 infrastructure.
The following Layer 2 security tools are integrated into the Cisco Catalyst switches:
Port security
DHCP snooping
Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI)
    IP Source Guard

28

---

## Slide 32

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

---

