---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

Week 9
1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 9

In this session we will be investigating the following:
Endpoint protection
Host Based Intrusion Protection
Application Security
Cryptography
Access control
Obscuring Data

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

1. End Point Protection

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

Types of Security Equipment

There are many infrastructure equipment and software that organizations use to protect themselves from cyber security attacks.
Some of the most common items are:
Firewalls
Intrusion Detection/Prevention Systems
Virtual Private Networks
Antivirus and Antimalware software
Data Loss Prevention Software
Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)
Software
Two-Factor Authentication (2FA)

4

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

1a. Endpoint Threats

Endpoints can be defined as hosts (including most IoT devices) on the 	network that can access or be accessed by 	other hosts on the network. 
Each endpoint is potentially a way for 	malicious software to gain access to a 	network.
Devices that remotely access networks 	through VPNs are also endpoints that could 	inject malware into the VPN network from 	the public network.
Several common types of malware have 	been found to significantly change features 	in less than 24 hours in order to evade 	detection.

Malicious Spam Percentage

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

1b. Endpoint Security

As many attacks originate from inside the network, securing an internal LAN is nearly as important as securing the outside network perimeter.
After an internal host is infiltrated, it can become a starting point for an attacker to gain access to critical system devices, such as servers and sensitive information.
There are two internal LAN elements to secure:
1.1 Endpoints - Hosts are susceptible to malware-related attacks.
1.2 Network infrastructure - LAN 	infrastructure devices interconnect 	endpoints

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

1c. Host-Based Malware Protection

Host-based antimalware/antivirus software and host-based firewalls are used to protect mobile devices using VPN.
Antivirus/Antimalware Software
It is a software that is installed on a host to detect and mitigate viruses and malware. For example, Windows Defender Virus & Threat Protection, Cisco AMP for Endpoints, Norton Security, McAfee, Trend Micro, and others.

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

1c Host-Based Malware Protection (cont.)

Antimalware programs may detect viruses using three different approaches:
1. Signature-based: Recognizes various characteristics of known malware files
2. Heuristics-based: Recognizes general features shared by various types of malware
3. Behavior-based: (anomaly-based) Employs analysis of suspicious behavior that exceeds baseline standards.
Host-based antivirus protection, also known as agent-based, runs on every protected machine. Agent-based means it runs as a resident process on each device from start-up to end of the session.
Agentless vs Agent-Based Antivirus Software: Making The Right Choice (acronis.com)

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

1c. Host-Based Malware Protection (cont)

i. Host-based Firewall
This software is installed on a host.
It restricts incoming and outgoing connections to connections initiated by that host only.
Some firewall software can prevent a host from becoming infected and stop infected hosts from spreading malware to other hosts. This function is included in some operating systems.
For example, Windows includes Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security.

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

1c. Host-Based Malware Protection (cont)

ii. Host-based Security Suites
It is recommended to install a host-based suite of security products on home and business networks to provide a layered defense that will protect against most common threats.
These include antivirus, anti-phishing, safe browsing, Host-based intrusion prevention system, and firewall capabilities.

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

1c. Host-Based Malware Protection (cont)

ii. Host-based Security Suites (cont)
Host-based security products also provide telemetry function.
Most host-based security software includes robust logging functionality that is essential to cyber security operations.
The independent testing laboratory AV-TEST provides high- quality reviews of host-based protections, as well as information about many other security products.

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

1d. Network-Based Malware Protection

Network-based malware prevention devices are capable of sharing 	information among themselves to make better informed decisions.
Protecting endpoints in a borderless network can be accomplished 	using network-based, as well as host-based techniques.

Advanced Malware Protection Everywhere

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

1d. Network-Based Malware Protection (cont)

Some examples of devices and techniques that implement host protections at the network level:
Advanced Malware Protection (AMP) - Provides endpoint protection from viruses and malware.
Email Security Appliance (ESA) - Provides filtering of SPAM and potentially malicious emails before they reach the endpoint.
Web Security Appliance (WSA) - Provides filtering of websites and blacklisting
Network Admission Control (NAC) - Permits only authorized and compliant systems to connect to the network.

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

2. Host Based Intrusion Protection

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

2a. Host-Based Firewalls

Host-based personal firewalls are standalone software programs that control traffic entering or leaving a computer.
Host-based firewall applications can also be configured to issue alerts to users if suspicious behavior is detected.

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

2a. Host-Based Firewalls (cont)

Some examples of host-based firewalls:
Windows Defender Firewall – First included with Windows 	XP, Windows Firewall (now Windows Defender Firewall) uses 	a profile-based approach to firewall functionality.
iptables – This is an application that allows Linux system 	administrators to configure network access rules that are part 	of the Linux kernel
Netfilter modules.

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

2a. Host-Based Firewalls (cont)

Some more examples of host-based firewalls:
nftables – The successor to iptables, nftables is a Linux 	firewall application that uses a simple virtual machine in the 	Linux kernel.
TCP Wrappers – This is a rule-based access control and 	logging system for Linux.

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

2b. Host-Based Intrusion Detection

A Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) is designed to protect hosts against known and unknown malware.
A HIDS can perform detailed 	monitoring and reporting on 	the system configuration and 	application activity.

Host-based Intrusion Detection Architecture

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

2b. Host-Based Intrusion Detection (cont)

HIDS is a comprehensive security application that combines the functionalities of antimalware applications with firewall functionality.
As HIDS must run directly on the host, it is considered as an agent-based system.

Host-based Intrusion Detection Architecture

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

2b. i.HIDS Operation

A HIDS can prevent intrusion because it uses signatures to detect known malware and prevent it from infecting a system.
Some malware families exhibit polymorphism (“stealth”).
An additional set of strategies are used to detect the possibility of successful intrusions by malware that evades signature detection:

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

2b. i.HIDS Operation (cont)

Anomaly based - Host system 	behavior is compared to a learned 	baseline model of normal behavior. If 	an intrusion is detected, the HIDS can 	log details of the intrusion, send 	alerts to security management 	systems, and take action to prevent 	the attack.
Policy based - Normal system 	behavior is described by rules, or the 	violation of rules, that are 	predefined. Violation of these policies 	will result in action by the HIDS, such 	as shut down of software processes.

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

2b. ii. HIDS Products

Most of the HIDS utilize software on the host and some sort of centralized security management functionality that allows integration with network security monitoring services and threat intelligence.
Some examples are Cisco AMP, AlienVault USM, Tripwire, and Open Source HIDS SECurity (OSSEC).

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

2b. ii. HIDS Products (cont)

OSSEC uses a central manager server and agents that are installed on individual hosts.
The OSSEC server, or Manager, can also receive and analyze alerts from a variety of network devices and firewalls over syslog.
OSSEC monitors system logs on hosts and also conducts file integrity checking.

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

3. Application Security

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

3a. Attack Surface

An attack surface is the total sum of the vulnerabilities in a given system that is accessible to an attacker.
It can consist of * open ports on servers or hosts, * software running on internet-facing servers, *wireless network protocols, and*users.
Components of the Attack Surface:
Network Attack Surface: Exploits vulnerabilities in networks.
Software Attack Surface: Delivered through exploitation of vulnerabilities in web, cloud, or host-based software applications.
Human Attack Surface: Exploits weaknesses in user behavior.

An Expanding Attack Surface

---

## Slide 26

OFFICIAL

3b. Application Blacklisting and Whitelisting

Limiting access to potential threats by creating lists of prohibited applications is known as blacklisting.
Application blacklists can dictate which user applications are not permitted to run on a
computer.
Whitelists specify which programs are allowed to run.
In this way, known vulnerable applications can be prevented from creating vulnerabilities on network hosts.

Application Blacklisting and Whitelisting

---

## Slide 27

OFFICIAL

3b. Application Blacklisting and Whitelisting (cont)

Websites can also be whitelisted 	and blacklisted.
These blacklists can be manually 	created, or they can be obtained 	from various security services.
Blacklists can be continuously updated by security services and distributed to firewalls and other security systems that use them.
Cisco’s Firepower security management system is an example of a system that can access the Cisco Talos security intelligence service to obtain blacklists.

---

## Slide 28

OFFICIAL

3c. System-Based Sandboxing

Sandboxing is a technique that allows suspicious files to be executed and analyzed in a safe environment.
Cuckoo Sandbox is a popular free malware analysis system sandbox. It can be run locally and have malware samples submitted to it for analysis.
ANY.RUN is an online tool that offers the ability to upload a malware sample for analysis like any online sandbox.

---

## Slide 29

OFFICIAL

4. Cryptology

---

## Slide 30

OFFICIAL

4. Overview
Cryptology is the science of making and breaking secret codes. Cryptography is a way to store and transmit data so only the intended recipient can read or process it. Modern cryptography uses computationally secure algorithms to make sure that cyber criminals cannot easily compromise protected information.

---

## Slide 31

OFFICIAL

4. Overview (cont)

The history of cryptography started in diplomatic circles thousands of years ago.
Messengers from a king’s court took
encrypted messages to other courts.
Occasionally, other courts not involved in the communication, attempted to steal messages sent to a kingdom they considered an adversary.
Not long after, military commanders started using encryption to secure messages.

---

## Slide 32

OFFICIAL

4. Overview (cont)

Each encryption method uses a specific algorithm, called a cipher, to encrypt and decrypt messages. A cipher is a series of well- defined steps used to encrypt and decrypt messages. There are several methods of creating ciphertext:
Transposition
Substitution
One-time pad

---

## Slide 33

OFFICIAL

4a. Two Types of Encryption

There are two classes of encryption algorithms:
1. Symmetric algorithms - These algorithms use the same pre-shared key, sometimes called a secret key pair, to encrypt and decrypt data. Both the sender and receiver know the pre-shared key before any encrypted communication begins.

---

## Slide 34

OFFICIAL

4a.Two Types of Encryption (cont)

2. Asymmetric algorithms - Asymmetrical encryption algorithms use one key to encrypt data and a different key to decrypt data. One key is public and the other is private.
In a public-key encryption system, any person can encrypt a message using the public key of the receiver, and the receiver is the only one that can decrypt it using his private key.
Parties exchange secure messages without needing a pre-shared key.
These algorithms are resource intensive and slower to execute.

---

## Slide 35

OFFICIAL

4b. Symmetrical versus Asymmetrical Encryption

Symmetric encryption systems are more efficient and can handle more data. However, key management with symmetric encryption systems is more problematic and harder to manage.
Asymmetric cryptography is more efficient at protecting the confidentiality of small amounts of data, and its size and speed make it more secure for tasks such as electronic key exchange which is a small amount of data rather than encrypting large blocks of data.

---

## Slide 36

OFFICIAL

4c. Common Encryption Standards

3DES (Triple DES): Digital Encryption Standard (DES) is a symmetric block cipher with 64-bit block size that uses a 56-bit key. Triple DES encrypts data three times and uses a different key for at least one of the three passes, giving it a cumulative key size of 112-168 bits.Legacy encryption now replaced with IDEA and other encryptions

---

## Slide 37

OFFICIAL

4c. Common Encryption Standards (cont)

IDEA: The International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) uses 64-bit blocks and 128-bit keys. IDEA performs eight rounds of transformations on each of the 16 blocks that results from dividing each 64-bit block. IDEA was the replacement for DES, and now PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) uses it.
AES: The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) has a fixed block size of 128-bits with a key size of 128, 192, or 256 bits. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) approved the AES algorithm in December 2001. The U.S. government uses AES to protect classified information.

---

## Slide 38

OFFICIAL

4d. Examples of Public-Key Encryption

RSA (Rivest_Shamir-Adleman) - uses the product of two very large prime numbers with an equal length of between 100 and 200 digits. Browsers use RSA to establish a secure connection.
Diffie-Hellman - provides an electronic exchange method to share the secret key. Secure protocols, such as Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), Transport Layer Security (TLS), Secure Shell (SSH), and Internet Protocol Security (IPsec), use Diffie-Hellman.
ElGamal - uses the U.S. government standard for digital signatures. This algorithm is free to use because no one holds the patent.
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) - uses elliptic curves as part of the algorithm. In the U.S., the National Security Agency uses ECC for digital signature generation and key exchange.

---

## Slide 39

OFFICIAL

4e. Uses for Cryptography

There are many uses for symmetric and asymmetric keys
The electronic payment industry uses 3DES.
Operating systems use DES to protect user files and system data with passwords.
Most encrypting file systems, such as NTFS, use AES.

---

## Slide 40

OFFICIAL

4f. Password Generating Tokens

A one-time password-generating token is a hardware device that uses cryptography to generate a one-time password.
A one-time password is an automatically generated numeric or alphanumeric string of characters that authenticates a user for one transaction of one session only.
The number changes every 30 seconds or so. The session password appears on a display and the user enters the password.

---

## Slide 41

OFFICIAL

4g. Other Applications

Four protocols use asymmetric key algorithms:
Internet Key Exchange (IKE), which is a fundamental component of IPsec Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), which is a means of implementing cryptography into a web browser.

---

## Slide 42

OFFICIAL

4g. Other Applications (cont)

Four protocols use asymmetric key algorithms:
Secure Shell (SSH), which is a protocol that provides a secure remote access connection to network devices.
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), which is a computer program that provides cryptographic privacy and authentication to increase the security of email communications.

---

## Slide 43

OFFICIAL

5. Access Control

---

## Slide 44

OFFICIAL

5a. Types of Access Control

Physical Access Controls - actual barriers deployed to prevent direct contact with systems. The goal is to prevent unauthorized users from gaining physical access to facilities, equipment, and other organizational assets. Physical access control determines who can enter (or exit), where they can enter (or exit), and when they can enter (or exit).
Logical Access Controls - hardware and software solutions used to manage access to resources and systems. These technology-based solutions include tools and protocols that computer systems use for identification, authentication, authorization, and accountability.

---

## Slide 45

OFFICIAL

5a. Types of Access Control (cont)

Administrative Access Controls - policies and procedures defined by organizations to implement and enforce all aspects of controlling unauthorized access. Administrative controls focus on personnel and business practices.
Administrative access controls often include, but may not be limited to:
Security education training and awareness programs;
A policy of least privilege (though it may be enforced with technical controls);
Bring your own device (BYOD) policies;
Password management policies;
Incident response plans (which will leverage other types of controls); and
Personnel management controls (recruitment, account generation, etc.).

---

## Slide 46

OFFICIAL

5b. Access Control Strategies

Mandatory access control (MAC) - restricts the actions that a subject can perform on an object. A subject can be a user or a process. An object can be a file, a port, or an input/output device. An authorization rule enforces whether or not a subject can access the object.
Discretionary access control (DAC) - DAC grants or restricts object access determined by the object’s owner. As the name implies, controls are discretionary because an object owner with certain access permissions can pass on those permissions to another subject.

---

## Slide 47

OFFICIAL

5b. Access Control Strategies (cont.)

Role-based access control (RBAC)	- is based on the role of the subject. Roles are job functions within an organization. Specific roles require permissions to perform certain operations. Users acquire permissions through their role. RBAC can work in combination with DAC or MAC by enforcing the policies of either one.
Rule-based access control - uses access control lists (ACLs) to help determine whether to grant access. A series of rules is contained in the ACL, as shown in the figure. The determination of whether to grant access depends on these rules. An example of such a rule is one that states that no employee may have access to the payroll file after hours or on weekends.

---

## Slide 48

OFFICIAL

5c. Identification

Identification enforces rules established by the authorization policy:
A subject requests access to a system resource.
Every time the subject requests access to a resource, the access controls determine whether to grant or deny access.
Cybersecurity policies determine which identification controls should be used.
The sensitivity of the information and information systems determine how stringent the controls.
Increased data breaches have forced many organizations to strengthen their identification controls.

---

## Slide 49

OFFICIAL

5d. Authentication Methods

What You Know - Passwords, passphrases, or PINs are all examples of something that the user knows. Passwords are the most popular method used for authentication.
What You Have – Smart phone (authentication apps), Smart cards and security key fobs are all examples of something that users have in their possession.
Who You Are - A unique physical characteristic, such as a fingerprint, retina, or voice, that identifies a specific user is called biometrics.

---

## Slide 50

OFFICIAL

5d. Authentication Methods (cont.)
Multi-factor Authentication - Multi-factor authentication uses at least two methods of verification. A security key fob is a good example. The two factors are something you know, such as a password, and something you have, such as a security key fob.

---

## Slide 51

OFFICIAL

5e. Authorization

Authorization controls what a user can and cannot do on the network after successful authentication:
After a user proves his or her identity, the system checks to see what network resources the user can access and what the users can do with the resources.
Authorization uses a set of attributes that describes the user’s
access to the network.

---

## Slide 52

OFFICIAL

5e. Authorization (cont.)

The system compares these attributes to the information contained within the authentication database, determines a set of restrictions for that user, and delivers it to the local router where the user is connected.
Defining authorization rules is the first step in controlling access. An authorization policy establishes these rules.

---

## Slide 53

OFFICIAL

5f. Accountability

Accountability traces an action back to a person or process making the change to a system, collects this information, and reports the usage data:
The organization can use this data for such purposes as auditing or billing.
The collected data might include the log in time for a user, whether the user log in was a success or failure, or what network resources the user accessed.
This allows an organization to trace actions, errors, and mistakes during an audit or investigation.
Implementing accountability consists of technologies, policies, procedures, and education.
Log files provide detailed information based on the parameters chosen.

---

## Slide 54

OFFICIAL

5g. Types of Security Controls

Preventative Controls - Prevent means to keep something from happening. Preventative access controls stop unwanted or unauthorized activity from happening.
Deterrent Controls - A deterrent is the opposite of a reward. A reward encourages individuals to do the right thing, while a deterrent discourages them from doing the wrong thing. Cybersecurity professionals and organizations use deterrents to limit or mitigate an action or behavior.
Deterrents do not always stop these actions.
Detective Controls - Detection is the act or process of noticing or discovering something. Access control detections identify different types of unauthorized activity. Detection systems can be very simple, such as a motion detector or security guard. They can also be more complex, such as an intrusion detection system.

---

## Slide 55

OFFICIAL

5g. Types of Security Controls (cont.)

Corrective Controls - Corrective counteracts something that is undesirable. Organizations put corrective access controls in place after a system experiences a threat. Corrective controls restore the system back to a state of confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA). They can also restore systems to normal after unauthorized activity occurs.
Recovery Controls - Recovery is a return to a normal state. Recovery access controls restore resources, functions, and capabilities after a violation of a security policy. Recovery controls can repair damage, in addition to stopping any further damage. These controls have more advanced capabilities over corrective access controls.
Compensative Controls - Compensate means to make up for something. Compensative access controls provide options to other controls to bolster enforcement in support of a security policy. A compensative control can also be a substitution used in place of a control that is not possible under the circumstances.

---

## Slide 56

OFFICIAL

6. Obscuring Data

---

## Slide 57

OFFICIAL

6a. Data Masking

Data Masking is a technology that secures data by replacing sensitive information with a non-sensitive version. The non-sensitive version looks and acts like the original. This means that a business process can use non-sensitive data and there is no need to change the supporting applications or data storage facilities.
In the most common use case, masking limits the propagation of sensitive data within IT systems by distributing surrogate data sets for testing and analysis.
There are data masking techniques that can ensure that data remains meaningful
but changed enough to protect it:
Substitution - replaces data with authentic looking values to apply anonymity to the data records.
Shuffling - derives a substitution set from the same column of data that a user wants to mask. This technique works well for financial information in a test database, for example.
Tokenisation – replaces sensitive data with a non-sensitive token that is then used during the transaction with the sensitive data stored in a secure vault.

---

## Slide 58

OFFICIAL

6b. Steganography

Steganography conceals data (the message) in another file such as a graphic, audio, or other text file.
The advantage of steganography over cryptography is that the secret message does not attract any special attention. No one would ever know that a picture actually contained a secret message by viewing the file either electronically or in hardcopy.
There are several components involved in hiding data:
There is the embedded data, which is the secret message.
Cover-text (or cover-image or cover-audio) hides the embedded data producing the stego-text (or stego-image or stego-audio).
A stego-key controls the hiding process.
NOTE: A lot of Malware (viruses, trojan horse) is hidden in other files!

---

## Slide 59

OFFICIAL

6c. Data Obfuscation

Software watermarking legally protects software from unauthorized access or modification.
Software watermarking inserts a secret message into the program
as proof of ownership.
The secret message is the software watermark. If someone tries to remove the watermark, the result is nonfunctional code.

---

## Slide 60

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

---

