---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

1

Chapter 3

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 3

In this session we will be investigating common and emerging cyber security attacks, and techniques:
Threat actors, goals and vectors
How a system is infiltrated
Trends and operation of cyber-attacks

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

Attackers and their Tools

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

Threat
– Potential danger to an asset such as data or the network.
Vulnerability and Attack Surface
Weakness in a system or its design that could be exploited by a threat.
Attack surface describes different points where an attacker could get into a system and could get to the data (Example – operating system without security patches)
Exploit
Mechanism used to leverage a vulnerability to compromise an asset.
Remote exploit – works over the network.
Local exploit – threat actor has user or administrative access to the end system.
Risk
Combined factors of the Likelihood that a threat will exploit a vulnerability of an asset and result in an undesirable consequence.

Who is Attacking Our Network?

Threat, Vulnerability, and Risk definitions

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

White Hat Hackers
Ethical hackers who use their programming skills for good, ethical, and legal purposes.
Perform penetration tests to discover vulnerabilities and report to developers before exploitation.
Grey Hat Hackers
Commit crimes and do unethical things but not to cause damage.
May compromise network and then disclose the problem so the organization can fix the problem.
Black Hat Hackers
Unethical criminals who violate security for personal gain, or for malicious reasons, such as attacking networks.
Note: Threat actors is a term used to describe both grey and black hat hackers.

Who is Attacking Our Network?

Hacker vs. Threat Actor

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

Who is Attacking Our Network?

Evolution of Threat Actors

Script Kiddies
Hackers who lack deep technical skills, who run existing tools and exploits, to cause harm.
State-Sponsored
White or black hats who steal other governments’ secrets, gather intelligence, and sabotage networks.
Targets are foreign governments, terrorist groups, and corporations.
Cybercriminals
Black hats stealing billions of dollars from consumers and businesses.
Hacktivists
Grey hats who rally and protest against political and social ideas.
Post articles and videos to leak sensitive information.
Vulnerability Broker
Discover exploits and report them to vendors, sometimes for prizes or rewards.

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

Money-motivated threat actors.
Buy, sell, and trade exploits, and private information and intellectual property.
Steal from consumers, small businesses, as well as large enterprises and industries.

Who is Attacking Our Network?

Cybercriminals

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

Develop good cybersecurity awareness.
Report cybercrime to authorities.
Be aware of potential threats in email and web
Guard important information from theft.
Organizations must take action and protect their assets, users, and customers.
Develop cybersecurity tasks and implement those tasks on a reoccurring basis.

Who is Attacking Our Network?

Cybersecurity Tasks

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

Each attack has unique identifiable attributes that are known as cyber threat indicators or simply attack indicators.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) use the Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) system that enables sharing of verified attack indicators with public and private sector organizations

Who is Attacking Our Network?

Cyber Threat Indicators

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

Attackers use tools to exploit a vulnerability.
Sophistication of attack tools and technical knowledge to conduct attacks has changed since 1985.

Threat Actor Tools

Introduction of Attack Tools

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

Common Penetration (Pen) Testing Tools – used by black, grey and white hat hackers.
Password crackers - guesses to crack the password and access the system.
Wireless hacking tools - hack into a wireless network to detect security vulnerabilities.
Network scanning and hacking tools - probe network devices, servers, and hosts for open ports.
Packet crafting tools - probe and test a firewall’s robustness using specially
crafted forged packets.
Packet sniffers - capture and analyze packets within traditional Ethernet LANs or WLANs.
Rootkit detectors - directory and file integrity checker used by white hats to detect installed root kits.
Fuzzers - attempts to discover a computer system’s security vulnerabilities.

Threat Actor Tools

Evolution of Security Tools

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

Common Penetration (Pen)Testing Tools (Cont.)
Forensic tools - sniff out any trace of evidence existing in a particular computer system.
Debugger tools - reverse engineer binary files when writing exploits or malware analysis.
Hacking operating systems - designed operating systems preloaded with tools and technologies optimized for hacking.
Encryption tools - use algorithm schemes to encode the data to prevent unauthorized access to the encrypted data.
Vulnerability exploitation tools - determine whether a remote host is vulnerable to a security attack.
Vulnerability scanners - scan a network or system to identify open ports.

Threat Actor Tools

Evolution of Security Tools

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

Common Categories of Network Attacks
Eavesdropping - capture and listen to network traffic.
Data modification - alter the captured data in the packet without the knowledge of the sender or receiver.
IP address spoofing - constructs an IP packet that appears to originate from a valid address inside the corporate intranet.
Password-based - uses the stolen valid accounts to obtain lists of other users and network information.
Denial-of-Service - prevents normal use of a computer or network by valid users.
Man-in-the-Middle - hackers position themselves between a source and destination to monitor, capture and control communication.
Compromised-Key - gain access to a secured communication without the sender or receiver being aware of the attack by obtaining the secret key.
Sniffer - an application or device that can read, monitor, and capture network data exchanges and read network packets.

Threat Actor Tools

Categories of Attacks

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

Common Threats and Attacks

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

Malware

Types of Malware

Malware
Short for malicious software or malicious code.
Specifically designed to damage, disrupt, steal or inflict illegitimate action on data hosts or networks.

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Malware

Viruses

Attaches to apps or document and is then copied to system (RAM) memory where it can execute when app or document is loaded to system memory
Type of malware that propagates by inserting a copy of itself into another program or document.
Spread from one computer to another, infecting computers.
Spread by USB memory drives, CDs, DVDs, network shares and email.
Can lay dormant and activate at a specific time and date.
Requires human action to insert malicious code into another program.
Executes a specific unwanted, and often harmful, function on a computer.

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

Malware

Trojan Horses

Malicious code that is designed to look legitimate.
Often presented as a gift app or free tool or free image in online pages. 
Non-replicating type of malware.
Exploits the privileges of the user that runs the malware.
Can cause immediate damage, provide remote access to the system, or access through a back door.

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Malware

Trojan Horse Classification

Remote-access Trojan horse - Enables unauthorized remote access.
Data-sending Trojan horse - Provides the threat actor with sensitive data, such as passwords.
Destructive Trojan horse - Corrupts or deletes files.
Proxy Trojan horse - Will use the victim's computer as the source device to launch attacks and perform other illegal activities.
FTP Trojan horse - Enables unauthorized file transfer services on end devices.
Security software disabler Trojan horse - Stops antivirus programs or firewalls from functioning.
DoS Trojan horse - Slows or halts network activity.

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

Malware

Worms

Executes code and installs itself in the memory of the infected device.
Automatically replicates itself and spreads across the network from system to system.
Components of a worm attack include an exploiting vulnerability, delivering a malicious payload, and self-propagation.
While a Virus requires a host program to run, worms can run by themselves by exploiting vulnerabilities in an Operating System or application.

Code Red Worm Infection– 19 Hours Later 300,000 servers

Initial Code Red Worm Infection – 658 servers

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Malware

Worm Components

Worm attacks consist of three components:
Enabling vulnerability - Worm installs itself using an exploit mechanism, such as an infected web page, an email attachment, an executable file, or a Trojan horse, on a vulnerable system.
Propagation mechanism - After gaining access to a device, the worm replicates itself and locates new targets..
Payload - Any malicious code that results in some action is a payload which is used to create a backdoor that allows a threat actor access to the infected host or to create a DoS attack.

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

Malware

Ransomware

Malware that denies access to the infected computer system or its data. It may or may not try to export (steal) the data as well.
Frequently uses an encryption algorithm to encrypt system files and data, cannot be easily decrypted.
Cybercriminals demand payment to release the computer system or its now encrypted data.
Email and malicious advertising are vectors for ransomware campaigns.
Social engineering is also used, cybercriminals who identify themselves as security technicians call homes and persuade users to connect to a website that downloads the ransomware to the user’s computer.

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

Malware

Other Malware

Modern Malware
Spyware - Used to gather information about a user and send the information to another entity without the user’s consent. Can be a system monitor, Trojan horse, Adware, tracking cookies, and key loggers.
Adware - Typically displays annoying pop-ups to generate revenue for its author. May analyze user interests by tracking the websites visited and send pop-up advertising pertinent to those sites.
Scareware - Includes scam software which uses social engineering to shock or induce anxiety by creating the perception of a threat. Generally directed at an unsuspecting user and attempts to persuade the user to infect a computer by taking action to address the bogus threat.
Phishing - Attempts to convince people to divulge sensitive information. Examples include receiving an email from their bank asking users to divulge their account and PIN numbers.
Rootkits - Installed on a compromised system. After it is installed, it continues to hide its intrusion and provides privileged access to the threat actor mostly during the system boot procedures.

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

Malware

Common Malware Behaviors

Computers infected with malware often exhibit one or more of the following symptoms or behaviours:
Appearance of strange files, programs, or desktop icons.
Antivirus and firewall programs are turning off or reconfiguring settings.
Computer screen is freezing or system is crashing.
Emails are spontaneously being sent without your knowledge to your contact list.
Files have been modified or deleted.
Increased CPU and/or memory usage.
Problems connecting to networks.
Slow computer or web browser speeds.
Unknown processes or services running.
Unknown TCP or UDP ports open.
Connections are made to hosts on the Internet without user action.
Strange computer behavior.

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

Malware

Lab – Anatomy of Malware

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Types of Network Attacks

This course classifies attacks in three major categories:

By categorizing network attacks, it is possible to address types of attacks rather than individual attacks.

---

## Slide 26

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Reconnaissance Attacks

Also known as information gathering, reconnaissance attacks perform unauthorized discovery and mapping of systems, services, or vulnerabilities.
Analogous to a thief surveying a neighborhood by going door-to-door pretending to sell something.
Called host profiling when directed at an endpoint.
Recon attacks precede intrusive access attacks or DoS attack and employ the use of widely available tools.

---

## Slide 27

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Sample Reconnaissance Attacks

Techniques used by threat actors:
Perform an information query of a target - Threat actor is looking for initial information about a target. Tools: Google search, public information from DNS registries using dig, nslookup, and whois.
Initiate a ping sweep of the target networks - Threat actor initiates a ping sweep of the target networks revealed by the previous DNS queries to identify target network addresses. Identifies which IP addresses are active and creation of logical topology.
Initiate a port scan of active IP addresses - Threat actor initiates port scans on hosts identified by the ping sweep to determine which ports or services are available. Port scanning tools such as Nmap, SuperScan, Angry IP Scanner, and NetScan Tools initiate connections to the target hosts by scanning for ports that are open on the target computers.

---

## Slide 28

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Access Attacks

Access attacks exploit vulnerabilities in authentication services, FTP services, and web services to retrieve data, gain access to systems, or to escalate access privileges.


There are at least three reasons that threat actors would use access attacks on networks or systems:
To retrieve data
To gain access to systems
To escalate access privileges

---

## Slide 29

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Types of Access Attacks

Password attack - Attempt to discover critical system passwords using phishing attacks, dictionary attacks, brute-force attacks, network sniffing, or using social engineering techniques.
Pass-the-hash - Has access to the user’s machine and uses malware to gain access to the stored password hashes. The threat actor then uses the hashes to authenticate to other remote servers or devices.
Trust exploitation - Use a trusted host to gain access to network resources.
Port redirection - Uses a compromised system as a base for attacks against
other targets.
Man-in-the-middle attack - Threat actor is positioned in between two legitimate entities in order to read, modify, or redirect the data that passes between the two parties.
IP, MAC, DHCP Spoofing - One device attempts to pose as another by falsifying address data.

---

## Slide 30

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Types of Access Attacks (Cont.)

---

## Slide 31

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Social Engineering Attacks

Type of access attack that attempts to manipulate individuals into performing actions or divulging confidential information needed to access a network.
Examples of social engineering attacks include:
Pretexting - Calls an individual and lies to them in an attempt to gain access to privileged data. Pretends to need personal or financial data in order to confirm the identity of the recipient.
Spam - Use spam email to trick a user into clicking an infected link or downloading an infected file.
Phishing - Common version is the threat actor sends enticing custom-targeted spam email to individuals with the hope the target user clicks on a link or downloads malicious code.
Something for Something (Quid pro quo) - Requests personal information from a party in exchange for something like a free gift.
Tailgating - Follows an authorized person with a corporate badge into a badge- secure location.
Baiting - Threat actor leaves a malware-infected physical device, such as a USB flash drive in a public location such as a corporate washroom. The finder finds the device and inserts it into their computer.
Visual hacking – Physically observes the victim entering credentials such as a workstation login, an ATM PIN, or the combination on a physical lock. Also known as “shoulder surfing”.

---

## Slide 32

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks
Phishing Social Engineering Attacks

Phishing
Common social engineering technique that threat actors use to send emails that appear to be from a legitimate organization (such as a bank)
Variations include:
Spear phishing - Targeted phishing attack tailored for a specific individual or organization and is more likely to successfully deceive the target.
Whaling – Similar to spear phishing but is focused on big targets such as top executives of an organization.
Pharming – Compromises domain name services by injecting entries into local host files. Pharming also includes poisoning the DNS by compromising the DHCP servers that specify DNS servers to their clients.
Watering hole – Determines websites that a target group visits regularly and attempts to compromise those websites by infecting them with malware that can identify and target only members of the target group.
Vishing – Phishing attack using voice and the phone system instead of email.
Smishing – Phishing attack using SMS texting instead of email.

---

## Slide 33

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Strengthening the Weakest Link

People are typically the weakest link in cybersecurity
Organizations must actively train their personnel and create a
“security-aware culture.”

---

## Slide 34

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Lab – Social Engineering

---

## Slide 35

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Denial of Service Attacks

Typically result in some sort of interruption of service to users, devices, or applications.
Can be caused by overwhelming a target device with a large quantity of traffic or by using maliciously formatted packets.
A threat actor forwards packets containing errors that cannot be identified by the application, or forwards improperly formatted packets.

---

## Slide 36

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks
DDoS Attacks

DDoS Attacks
Compromises many hosts
Originates from multiple, coordinated sources
DDoS terms:
Zombies – Refers to a group of compromised hosts (i.e., agents). These hosts run malicious code referred to as robots (i.e., bots).
Bots – Bots are malware designed to infect a host and communicate with a handler system. Bots can also log keystrokes, gather passwords, capture and analyze packets, and more.
Botnet – Refers to a group of zombies infected using self- propagating malware (i.e., bots) and are controlled by handlers.
Handlers – Refers to a master command-and-control server controlling groups of zombies. The originator of a botnet can remotely control the zombies.
Botmaster – This is the threat actor in control of the botnet and handlers.

---

## Slide 37

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks
Example DDoS Attack

The threat actor builds or purchases a botnet of zombie hosts.
Zombie computers continue to scan and infect more targets to create more zombies.
When ready, the botmaster uses the handler systems to make the botnet of zombies carry out the DDoS attack on the chosen target.

---

## Slide 38

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Example DDoS Attack (Cont.)

1.

2.

3.

---

## Slide 39

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Buffer Overflow Attack

The goal is to find a system memory-related flaw on a server and exploit it.
Exploiting the buffer memory by overwhelming it with unexpected values usually renders the system inoperable.
For example:
Threat actor enters input that is larger than expected by the application running on a server.
The application accepts the large amount of input and stores it in memory.
It consumes the associated memory buffer and potentially overwrites adjacent memory, eventually corrupting the system and causing it to crash.

---

## Slide 40

OFFICIAL

Common Network Attacks

Evasion Methods

Threat actors learned long ago that malware and attack methods are most effective when they are undetected.
Some of the evasion methods used by threat actors include encryption and tunneling, resource exhaustion, traffic fragmentation, protocol-level misinterpretation, traffic substitution, traffic insertion, pivoting, and rootkits.
New attack methods are constantly being developed; therefore, network security personnel must be aware of the latest attack methods in order to detect them.

---

## Slide 41

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

---

## Slide 42

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

Summary

In this chapter you learned how networks are attacked, the types of threats and attacks used by threat actors.
Threat actors are gray or black hat hackers who attempt to gain unauthorized access to our networks. Cybercriminals are threat actors who are motivated solely by financial gain.
Threat actors use a variety of tools including password crackers, wireless hacking tools, network scanning and hacking tools, packet crafting tools, packet sniffers, rootkit detectors, forensic tools, debuggers, hacking operating systems, encryption tools, vulnerability exploitation tools, and vulnerability scanners.
These tools can be used for eavesdropping, data modification, IP address spoofing, password cracking, DoS, man-in-the-middle, compromised key, network sniffing.

---

## Slide 43

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

Summary (Cont.)

Malware is software that is specifically designed to damage, disrupt, steal, or generally
inflict some other “bad” or illegitimate action on data, hosts, or networks. The three most
common types of malware are viruses, worms, and Trojan horses.
A virus is a type of malware that propagates by inserting a copy of itself into another
program.
Worms are similar to viruses because they replicate and can cause the same type of damage. Whereas a virus requires a host program to run, worms can run by themselves.
A Trojan horse is software that appears to be legitimate, but it contains malicious code which exploits the privileges of the user that runs it.
The most dominate attack currently is ransomware which denies access to the infected computer system or its data until the owner pays the cybercriminal.

---

## Slide 44

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

Summary (Cont.)

Network attacks can be classified as one or more of the following:
Reconnaissance
Access attacks
Social engineering
DoS
Buffer overflow
Threat actors use a variety of evasion methods including:
Encryption and tunneling
Resource exhaustion
Traffic fragmentation
Protocol-level misinterpretation
Traffic substitution
Traffic insertion
Pivoting
Rootkits

---

## Slide 45

OFFICIAL

Chapter 6

New Terms and Commands

---

## Slide 46

OFFICIAL

Chapter 6

New Terms and Commands (Cont.)

---

## Slide 47

OFFICIAL

Select one of the 10 threats
Prepare a 5 minute explanation

47

---

