---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

Session 4
1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 4

In this session we will be investigating the following:
Identifying cyber attack methods on an organisation
Examples of IoT devices
Security vulnerabilities of IoT devices

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

Who is attacking our network?

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

Cyber attacks against an organisation

Threat, Vulnerability, and Risk

Attackers wants to access our assets such as data and other intellectual property, servers, computers, smart phones, tablets, and so on.

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Threat, Vulnerability, and Risk (Contd.)

To understand network security, it is important to know the following terms:

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Threat, Vulnerability, and Risk (Contd.)

Risk management is the process that balances the operational costs of providing protective measures with the gains achieved by protecting the asset.
Four ways to manage risk:

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Threat, Vulnerability, and Risk (Cont.)

Common network security terms:
Countermeasure – Actions taken to protect assets by 	mitigating a threat or reducing risk.
Impact - The potential damage to the organization that is 	caused by the threat
Note: A local exploit requires inside network access such as a user 	with an account on the network. It does not require an account on 	the network to exploit that network’s vulnerability.

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Hacker vs. Threat Actor

‘Hacker’ is a common term used to describe a threat actor. Hacker has a
variety of meanings that are as follows:
A clever programmer capable of developing new programs and making coding changes to existing programs to make them more efficient.
A network professional that uses sophisticated programming skills to ensure that networks are not vulnerable to attack.
An individual who run programs to prevent or corrupt data on servers.
Types of hackers:
White Hat hackers
Gray Hat hackers
Black Hat hackers

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Evolution of Threat Actors

Hacking started in the 1960s with phone freaking, which refers to using various audio frequencies to manipulate phone systems.
In the early 1960’s, threat actors realized that by mimicking a tone using a whistle, they could exploit the phone switches to make free long-distance calls.

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Evolution of Threat Actors

In the mid-1980’s, threat actors wrote ‘war dialing’
programs which dialed each telephone number in a given area in search of computers, bulletin board systems, and fax machines.
When a phone number was found, password-cracking programs were used to gain access.

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Cyber Threat Indicators

Indicators Of Compromise (IOC)

IOCs are the evidence that an attack has occurred and each attack has unique identifiable attributes.
IOCs can be features that identify malware files, IP addresses of servers that are used in attacks, filenames, and characteristic changes made to end system software, among others.
IOCs help cybersecurity personnel identify what has happened in an attack and develop defenses against the attack.

Summary of the IOC for a piece of malware

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Cyber Threat Indicators (Contd.)

Indicators of Attack (IOA)
IOA focus more on the motivation and strategies behind an attack and the attackers to gain access to assets.
IOAs helps to generate a proactive security approach that can be reused in multiple contexts and multiple attacks. Defending against a strategy can therefore prevent future attacks.

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Threat Sharing and Building Cybersecurity Awareness

Governments are now actively promoting cybersecurity.
The Australian government has made Cyber Security a major focus.
The US Cybersecurity Infrastructure and Security Agency (CISA) is leading efforts to automate the sharing of cybersecurity information with public and private organizations at no cost.
CISA use a system called Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) which enables the sharing of attack indicators between the US government and the private sector as soon as threats are verified.
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) delivers advice and solutions for the cybersecurity challenges of the EU member states.
The CISA and the National Cyber Security Alliance (NCSA) have an annual campaign 	in every October called National Cybersecurity Awareness Month (NCASM) to raise 	awareness about cybersecurity.

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

Attackers and Their Tools

Threat Sharing & Building Cybersecurity Awareness

The theme for the NCASM for 2019 was Own IT. Secure IT. Protect IT.
Security topics provided through campaign:
Social media safety
Updating privacy settings
Awareness of device app security
Keeping software up-to-date
Safe online shopping
Wi-Fi safety
Protecting customer data

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

Threat Actor Tools

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Threat Actor Tools

Introducing Attack Tools against Organisations

To exploit vulnerability in an organisation, a threat actor must have a technique or tool.
Over the years, attack tools have 	become more sophisticated, and 	highly automated.
These new tools require less technical knowledge to implement.
In the figure, drag the white circle across the timeline to view the relationship between the sophistication of attack tools versus the technical knowledge required to use them.

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

Threat Actor Tools

Evolution of Security Tools

Ethical hacking involves using many different types of tools to test the network and end devices.
To validate the security of a network and its systems, many network penetration testing tools have been developed and many of these tools can also be used by threat actors for exploitation.
Threat actors have also created various hacking tools. Cybersecurity personnel must also know how to use these tools when performing network penetration tests.

Note: Most of these tools are UNIX or Linux based; therefore, a security professional should have a strong UNIX and Linux background.

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Threat Actor Tools
Evolution of Security Tools (Contd.)

The following table lists some of the categories of common network penetration testing tools.

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

Threat Actor Tools

Evolution of Security Tools (Contd.)

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Categories of Attacks

Threat actors use the previously mentioned tools or a combination of tools to create various attacks against an organisation.
It is important to understand that threat actors use a variety of security tools to carry out these attacks.
The following table displays common types of attacks.

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

Threat Actor Tools

Categories of Attacks (Contd.)

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

Select one of the means that are used to attack an organisation
Prepare a 5 minute explanation

28

---

