---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

Week 10
1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 10

In this session includes the following:                                                   	New Topic:	Slide #
IT Security management framework…..3	Then this Revision;
Behavioral Approaches……………….…...9
Three dimensions of security…………..21
CIA Triad………………………………………….24
States of Data……………………………..…..30

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

2. IT Security Management Framework

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

2a.The ISO Model

Security professionals need to secure information from end-to-end within the organization. This is a monumental task, and it is unreasonable to expect one individual to have all of the requisite knowledge.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) developed a comprehensive framework to guide information security management.
The ISO 27000 cybersecurity model is to cybersecurity professionals what the OSI networking model is to network engineers. Both provide a framework for understanding and approaching complex tasks.

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

The ISO Model

ISO/IEC 27000 series is an information security standard published in 2005 and revised in 2013 and 2018. ISO publishes the ISO 27000 standards. Even though the standards are not mandatory, most countries use them as a de facto framework for implementing information security.

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

Using the ISO Cybersecurity Model

The ISO 27000 is a universal framework for every type of organization. In order to use the framework effectively, an organization must customise the domains, control objectives, and controls apply to its own unique environment and operations.That is, the framework is universal, but each organization must customise it to their situation.
The ISO 27001 control objectives serve as a checklist. The first step an organization takes is to determine if these control objectives are applicable to the organization.

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

Using the ISO Cybersecurity	Model

The ISO Cybersecurity Model and the States of Data
Different groups within an organization may be responsible for data in each of the various states.
For example, the network security group is
responsible for data during transmission.
Programmers and data entry people are responsible for data during processing.
The hardware and server support specialists are responsible for stored data. The ISO Controls specifically address security objectives for data in each of the three states.

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

Using the ISO Cybersecurity Model

The ISO Cybersecurity Model and Safeguards
The ISO 27001 control objectives relate directly to the organization’s cybersecurity
policies, procedures and guidelines which upper management determines.
The ISO 27002 controls provide technical direction. For example, upper management establishes a policy specifying the protection of all data coming in to or out of the organization. Implementing the technology to meet the policy objectives would not involve upper management.
It is the responsibility of IT professionals to properly implement and configure the equipment used to fulfill the policy directives set by upper management.

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

1. Behaviour-Based Approach

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

Behaviour-Based Approach

Behaviour-based security is a proactive approach to security in which all relevant activity is monitored so that deviations from normal behaviour patterns can be identified and dealt with quickly.

18

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

Behaviour-Based Approach

As machine learning continues to improve, this approach to security management is expected to play an increasingly more important role in securing computing at the edge of the network.

Similar techniques will also be used by the cyber criminals to detect vulnerabilities.

19

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

Traditional Methods

Traditional security software is signature- oriented: the software monitors data streams and compares data in transit to signatures in an anti-virus vendor's library of known threats. Easily defeated by stealth malware.

20

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

How Does it Work?

Behaviour-based security programs do monitor data streams, but then they compare data stream activity to a baseline of normal behaviour and look for anomalies.

21

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

How Does it Work?

Behaviour-based security products use applied mathematics and machine learning to flag events that are statistically significant.

22

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

23

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Hybrid Approaches

An organization may need to choose between signature- based and anomaly-based security software, but there is a broad range of intrusion detection and prevention products that combine both approaches.

24

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

Advantages

In general, signature-based tools are best as they scan at real time to identify and repel known threats, while behaviour-based are best for fighting zero-day exploits that have not yet made it onto a list of known threat signatures.
Most behavior-based security programs come with a standard set of policies for which behaviors should be allowed and which should be considered suspicious, but also allow administrators or machine learning algorithms to customize policies and create new policies.

25

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Behaviour Based Security Software

Behaviour-based security 	software may be used for 	the following purposes
network behaviour 	anomaly detection 	(NBAD)
behaviour-based 	intrusion detection
behaviour threat 	analysis (BTA)
user behaviour 	analytics (UBA)

26

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

Machine Learning

Some behaviour-security products are sophisticated enough to apply machine learning algorithms to data streams so that security analysts don't need to identify what comprises normal behaviour.

27

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Machine Learning

Behavioural biometrics are capable of mapping specific behaviour, such as typing patterns, to specific user behaviour

28

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

3. Three Dimensions of Security

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

The Three Dimensions

The Principles of Security
The first dimension of the cybersecurity cube identifies the goals to protect the cyber world. The goals identified in the first dimension are the foundational principles of the cybersecurity world.
These three principles are confidentiality, integrity and availability.
The principles provide focus and enable cybersecurity specialists to prioritize actions in protecting the cyber world.
Use the acronym CIA to remember these three principles.
The States of Data
The cyber world is a world of data; therefore, cybersecurity specialists focus on protecting data. The second dimension of the cybersecurity cube focuses on the problems of protecting all of the states of data in the cyber world. Data has three possible states:
Data at rest or in storage
Data in transit 
Data in process

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

The Three Dimensions

Cybersecurity Safeguards
The third dimension of the cybersecurity sorcery cube defines the types of powers used to protect the cyber world. The sorcery cube identifies the three types of powers:
Technologies - devices, and products available to protect information systems and fend off cyber criminals.
Policies and Practices - procedures, and guidelines that enable the citizens of the cyber world to stay safe and follow good practices.
People - Aware and knowledgeable about their world and the dangers that threaten their world.

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

4. CIA Triad

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

Confidentiality

The Principle of Confidentiality
Confidentiality prevents the disclosure of information to unauthorized people, resources and processes. Another term for confidentiality is privacy.
Organizations need to train employees about best practices in safeguarding sensitive information to protect themselves and the organization from attacks.
Methods used to ensure confidentiality include data
encryption, authentication, and access control.
Protecting Data Privacy
Organizations collect a large amount of data and much of this data is not sensitive because it is publicly available, like names and telephone numbers.
Other data collected, though, is sensitive. Sensitive information is data protected from unauthorized access to safeguard an individual or an organization.

---

## Slide 26

OFFICIAL

Confidentiality

Access control defines a number of protection schemes that prevent unauthorized access to a computer, network, database, or other data resources. The concepts of AAA involve three security services: Authentication, Authorization and Accounting. Authentication verifies the identity of a user to prevent unauthorized access. Users prove their identity with a username or I.D.
Authorization services determine which resources users can access, along with the operations that users can perform. Authorization can also control when a user has access to a specific resource.
Accounting keeps track of what users do, including what they access, the amount of time they access resources, and any changes made.

---

## Slide 27

OFFICIAL

Confidentiality

Confidentiality and privacy seem interchangeable, but from a legal standpoint, they mean different things.
Most privacy data is confidential, but not all confidential data is private. Access to confidential information occurs after confirming proper authorization. Financial institutions, hospitals, medical professionals, law firms, and businesses handle confidential information.
Confidential information has a non-public status. Maintaining confidentiality is more of an ethical duty.
Privacy is the appropriate use of data. When organizations collect information provided by customers or employees, they should only use that data for its intended purpose.

---

## Slide 28

OFFICIAL

Integrity

Principle of Data Integrity
Integrity is the accuracy, consistency, and trustworthiness of data during its entire life
cycle.
Another term for integrity is quality.
Methods used to ensure data integrity include hashing, data validation checks, data consistency checks, and access controls.
Need for Data Integrity
The need for data integrity varies based on how an organization uses data. For example, Facebook does not verify the data that a user posts in a profile.
A bank or financial organization assigns a higher importance to data integrity than Facebook does. Transactions and customer accounts must be accurate.
Protecting data integrity is a constant challenge for most organizations. Loss of data integrity can render entire data resources unreliable or unusable.
Integrity Checks
An integrity check is a way to measure the consistency of a collection of data (a file, a picture, or a record). The integrity check performs a process called a hash function to take a snapshot of data at an instant in time.

---

## Slide 29

OFFICIAL

Availability

Data availability is the principle used to describe the need to maintain availability of information systems and services at all times. Cyberattacks and system failures can prevent access to information systems and services.
Methods used to ensure availability include system redundancy, system backups, increased system resiliency, equipment maintenance, up-to-date operating systems and software, and plans in place to recover quickly from unforeseen disasters.
High availability systems typically include three design principles: eliminate single points of failure, provide for reliable crossover, and detect failures as they occur.
Organizations can ensure availability by implementing the following:
Equipment maintenance
OS and system updates
Test backups
Plan for disasters
Implement new technologies
Monitor unusual activity
Test to verify availability

---

## Slide 30

OFFICIAL

States of Data

---

## Slide 31

OFFICIAL

Data at Rest

Stored data refers to data at rest. Data at rest means that a type of storage device retains the data when no user or process is using it.
A storage device can be local (on a computing device) or centralized (on the network). A number of options exist for storing data.
Direct-attached storage (DAS) is storage connected to a computer. A hard drive or USB flash drive is an example of direct-attached storage.

---

## Slide 32

OFFICIAL

Data at Rest

Redundant array of independent disks (RAID) uses multiple hard drives in an array, which is a method of combining multiple disks so that the operating  system sees them as a single disk. RAID provides improved performance and fault tolerance.
A network attached storage (NAS) device is a storage device connected to a network that allows storage and retrieval of data from a centralized location by authorized network users. NAS devices are flexible and scalable, meaning administrators can increase the capacity as needed.
A storage area network (SAN) architecture is a network-based storage system. SAN systems connect to the network using high-speed interfaces allowing improved performance and the ability to connect multiple servers to a centralized disk storage repository.

---

## Slide 33

OFFICIAL

Data In Transit

Data transmission involves sending information from one device to another. There are numerous methods to transmit information between devices including:
Sneaker net – uses removable media to physically move data from one computer
to another
Wired networks – uses cables to transmit data
Wireless networks – uses the airwaves to transmit data
The protection of transmitted data is one of the most challenging jobs of a cybersecurity professional. The greatest challenges are:
Protecting data confidentiality – cyber criminals can capture, save and steal data in-transit.
Protecting data integrity – cyber criminals can intercept and alter data in-transit.
Protecting data availability - cyber criminals can use rogue or unauthorized devices to interrupt data availability.

---

## Slide 34

OFFICIAL

Data In Process

The third state of data is data in process. This refers to data during initial input, modification, computation, or output.
Protection of data integrity starts with the initial input of data.
Organizations use several methods to collect data, such as manual data entry, scanning forms, file uploads, and data collected from sensors.
Each of these methods pose potential threats to data integrity.
Data modification refers to any changes to the original data such as users manually modifying data, programs processing and changing data, and equipment failing resulting in data modification.
Processes like encoding/decoding, compression/decompression and encryption/decryption are all examples of data modification. Malicious code also results in data corruption.

---

## Slide 35

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

---

