---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

1

Session 1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 1

In this session we will be investigating the following:
Online identity
Personal data
Organizational data, and why we should protect it

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

There Is No Such Thing As Absolute Security

3

Given enough time, tools, skills, and inclination, a malicious person can break through any security measure.

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

There Is No Such Thing As Absolute Security

4

See doc on safe/faults

The Quantum Effect On Cybersecurity (forbes.com)

If viewing the video using Microsoft Edge Browser, use the Immersive Reader (F9) tool to remove all the advertising clutter.

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

What is CyberSecurity?

5

Definition:	Cyber security refers to the protection of 
information systems (hardware, software and associated infrastructure), 
the data on them, and 
the services they provide, 
from unauthorised access, harm or misuse.

This includes harm caused intentionally by the operator of the system, or accidentally, as a result of failing to follow security procedures.
UKNationalCyberSecurityStrategy

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

CyBOK

6

Note the human related knowledge areas as well as the expected computer related areas.

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

19 CyBOK Knowledge areas

7

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

Reading – see cybok.xps in handouts

8

Present your understanding of knowledge areas to group

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

Information Security Goals – CIA T

9

All information security measures try to address at least one of three (or 4) goals:
Protect the confidentiality of data
Preserve the integrity of data
Promote the availability of data for authorized use
Trust by vendors and users.(Are you limiting YOUR online activities because you no longer fully trust the security of online systems?)

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

10

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

Confidentiality

11

Confidentiality is sometimes referred to as the principle of least privilege, meaning that users should be given only enough privilege to perform their duties, and no more.
Common synonyms for confidentiality include
privacy,
secrecy, and
discretion.

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

Confidentiality

12

Confidentiality models are intended to block unauthorized access to information and make sure accidental disclosure of sensitive information is not possible.
Common confidentiality controls are user IDs and passwords, 2 factor verification 2FV.

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

Integrity models

13

Integrity models keep data pure and trustworthy by protecting system data from intentional or accidental changes.
Integrity models have three goals:
Prevent unauthorized users from making modifications to data or programs
Prevent authorized users from making improper or unauthorized modifications
Maintain internal and external consistency of data and programs

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

Integrity models

An example of integrity checks is balancing a batch of transactions to make sure that all the information is present and accurately accounted for.

14

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

Availability models

Availability models keep data and resources available for authorized use, especially during emergencies or disasters.

15

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Availability models

16

Three common challenges to availability:
Denial of service (DoS) due to intentional attacks or because of undiscovered flaws in implementation (for example, a program written by a programmer who is unaware of a flaw that could crash the program if a certain unexpected input is encountered)
Loss of information system capabilities because of natural disasters (fires, floods, storms, or earthquakes) or human actions (bombs or strikes)
Equipment failures during normal use

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

CIA Triad

17

Ethical Hacking - Security (CIA) Triad

Triad video – 11 mins.

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Sources of threat

What do you believe are the most likely threats to information security?

18

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

Phishing

19

“Phishing is the fraudulent attempt to obtain sensitive information such as usernames, passwords and credit card details by disguising as a trustworthy entity in an electronic communication”

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Phishing

20

Search for these three examples of successful Phishing attacks:
Mr Walter Stephan, CEO of FACC
Seagate employees W-2 tax records
Free FIFA World Cup Tickets

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

https://phishingquiz.withgoogle.com/

Quiz challenge

21

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

Hacking

White Hat: The Good Kind
Black Hat: The Not Good Kind
Hacktivist: “Thinks They’re Doing Good Kind”
as well as many more.

22

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

Hacking may only be one part of a broader cyber attack

23

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

Bots

24

Bots are micro programs that can be designed to scan a system to find specific information. 
Bots are used widely for both good and bad
Cyber criminals use bots to find credit card information, weak points in new software patches or previously unknown access points that can then be exploited.
They are used in the early stages of an attack to locate the simplest method
of access.

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

Compliance with Cyber Security Policies

25

Does your workplace allow any of the following:
signing into personal social media accounts from work machines?
emailing sensitive data to work from a home machine or such data to your home machine?
connecting company devices to unsecured networks?
storing passwords on Word documents?

---

## Slide 26

OFFICIAL

Misuse Of Employee Privileges

26

The most common issues tend to be company devices being used for non-work purposes or else for work but in insecure locations.
Preventative actions: 
blocking access to websites that pose a potential threat through malware or phishing, 
ensuring administrator privileges remain with the IT department, 
automated monitoring of device usage

---

## Slide 27

OFFICIAL

BYOD (Bring Your Own Device)

27

A study conducted by HP identified that 97% of employees’ devices contained privacy issues and 75% did not have sufficient data encryption.
Storage devices;

laptops, 
mobile phones, 
tablets 
and even wearable technology

---

## Slide 28

OFFICIAL

Staff training

28

Training ALL staff to be cyber aware and compliant with cyber security policies and procedures is essential.
Provide ALL teams with the right skills to deal with potential threats before they mature into an imminent
risk to your systems integrity.

---

## Slide 29

OFFICIAL

“Disaster” Recovery Planning

29

Assume one day the organization will suffer a successful cyber-attack. 
Post attack - obtain data from all network logs, error reports and personal observations that could indicate the cause of the data breach.
Then review the data breach itself:
What preventative measures were put in place to stop it
What immediately followed the termination of the threat.

---

## Slide 30

OFFICIAL

Password Cracking

30

Generally accepted guidance when creating a strong password include:
Don’t use the same password over and over for different applications.
Avoid information about your family (for example: names or date of birth) 
Ensure all passwords are significantly different by adding unusual symbols.

---

## Slide 31

OFFICIAL

Ransomware

Software designed to block access to a machine and files until a sum of money is paid.
Ensure that critical files are backed up either continuously or very frequently. 
Keep your backup activity diversified and encrypt it so it makes unauthorized
access harder to accomplish.

31

---

## Slide 32

OFFICIAL

Select one of the 10 threats
Prepare a 5 minute explanation

32

---

