---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

Session 5
1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 5

In this session we will be investigating the following:
Common Network Attacks - Reconnaissance, Access, and Social Engineering
Network Attacks - Denial of Service, Buffer Overflows, and Evasion
Explaining how these attacks work

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

Malware

Mostly revision, so read to refresh your knowledge and move on.

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

Types of Malware

Malware is a code or software designed to damage, disrupt, steal, or inflict some other ‘bad’
or illegitimate action on data, hosts, or networks.
The three most common types of malware are Virus, Worm, and Trojan horse.

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

Viruses

A virus is a type of malware that attaches a copy of itself into an executable program file or document.
When the program file or document is run, that is, loaded into RAM, the CPU processes the virus code along with the rest.  Part of the virus code instructs the CPU to copy the virus code to other object resources of the computer and to objects in other network end points.
A simple virus may install itself at the first line of code in an executable file.
The “payload” of a Virus can range from the harmless, for those that display a picture on the screen to the destructive. For example, delete files on the hard drive.
Most viruses spread by USB memory drives, CDs, DVDs, network shares, and email. Email viruses are a common type of virus.

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

Trojan Horses

Trojan horse malware is a software that is mostly legitimate code, but it contains malicious code which exploits the privileges of the user that runs it.
Trojans are found attached to some free online games or other online “goodies”.
So, users are commonly tricked into loading and executing the Trojan horse malware on their systems
The Trojan horse concept is flexible.
It can cause immediate damage, provide remote access to the system, or access to the system through a back door.
Custom-written Trojan horses with a specific target are difficult to detect.

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

Trojan Horses Classification

Trojan horses are usually classified according to the damage that they cause, or the manner in which they breach a system.

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

Trojan Horses Classification

The types of Trojan horses are as follows:

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

Worms

Computer worms are similar to viruses because they replicate themselves. But worms do no need to attach themselves to program files or documents. Instead to load into system RAM by exploiting vulnerabilities in OS or application software or network protocols.
Worms can slow down networks as each replication uses more and more of the system or network resources such as RAM, available storage or network bandwidth. 
Once the host is infected, the worm spreads rapidly over the network.
In 2001, the Code Red worm had initially infected 658 servers. Within 19 hours, the worm had infected over 300,000 servers.

Initial Code Red Worm Infection

Code Red Infection 19 hours later

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

Worm Component

The three worm components are as follows:
Enabling vulnerability - A worm installs itself using an exploit mechanism, such as an email attachment, an executable file, or a Trojan horse, on a vulnerable system.
Propagation mechanism - After gaining access to a device, the worm replicates itself and locates new targets.
Payload - Any malicious code that results in some action is a payload. Most often this is used to create a backdoor that allows a threat actor to access the infected host or to create a DoS attack. Worms can have similar payloads to viruses.
The Stuknet worm released in 2010 was the first of a new generation of stealthy worms with very selective sophisticated targets (Iranian nuclear enrichment SCADA systems).

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

Worm Components

Worms are self-contained programs that attack a system to exploit a known vulnerability.
Upon successful exploitation, the worm copies itself from the attacking host to the newly exploited system and the cycle begins again.
This propagation mechanism is commonly deployed in a way that is difficult to detect.
Note: Worms never stop spreading on the internet. After they are released, worms continue to propagate until all possible sources of infection are properly patched.

Code Red Worm Propagation

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

Ransomware

Ransomware is a malware that denies access to the infected computer system or its data.
Ransomware frequently uses an encryption algorithm to encrypt system files and data. A notice is then generated demanding the user pay a ransom (often as bitcoin) to receive the decryption key.
Email and malicious advertising, also known as malvertising,
are vectors for ransomware campaigns.

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

Ransomware

Social engineering is also employed, when cybercriminals pretending to be security technicians make random calls at homes and persuade users to connect to a website that downloads ransomware to the user’s computer.

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

Ransomware

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

Other Malware
The examples of modern malware are as follows:

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Common Malware Behaviors

Computers infected with malware often exhibit one or more of the following symptoms:
Appearance of strange files, programs, or
desktop icons
Antivirus and firewall programs are turning off or reconfiguring settings
Computer screen is freezing or system is crashing
Emails are spontaneously being sent without your knowledge to your contact list
Files have been modified or deleted
Increased CPU and/or memory usage

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

Common Malware Behaviors (cont.)

Problems connecting to networks
Slow computer or web browser speeds
Unknown processes or services running
Unknown TCP or UDP ports open
Connections are made to hosts on the Internet without user action
Strange computer behavior
Note: Malware behavior is not limited to the above list.

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Common Networking Attacks

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

Types of Network Attacks

Malware is a means to get a payload delivered .
When a payload is delivered and installed, it can be used to cause a variety of network-related attacks from the inside as well as from the outside.
Network attacks are classified into three categories:
Reconnaissance Attacks
Access Attacks
DoS Attacks

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Reconnaissance Attacks

Reconnaissance is information gathering.
Threat actors use reconnaissance (or recon) attacks to do unauthorized discovery and mapping of systems, services, or vulnerabilities.
Recon attacks precede access attacks or DoS attacks.

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

Reconnaissance Attacks
The techniques used by malicious threat actors to conduct reconnaissance attacks are as follows:

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

Reconnaissance Attacks
Performing Ping Sweep: A threat actor will do a ping sweep of the target’s network address to discover live and active IP addresses.

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

Reconnaissance Attacks

Internet Information Queries: A threat actor can use the who is command to find information about a target.

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

Reconnaissance Attacks

Performing Port Scan: A threat actor can perform a port scan on the discovered active IP addresses using Nmap.

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

Access Attacks

Access attacks exploit known vulnerabilities in authentication services, FTP services, and web services to gain entry into web accounts, confidential databases, and other sensitive information.
Password Attacks
The threat actor attempts to discover critical system passwords using a variety of password cracking tools.

---

## Slide 26

OFFICIAL

Access Attacks

Spoofing Attacks
The threat actor device attempts to pose as another device by falsifying data.
Common spoofing attacks include IP spoofing, MAC spoofing, and DHCP spoofing.
Trust exploitations
Port redirections
Man-in-the-middle attacks
Buffer overflow attacks

---

## Slide 27

OFFICIAL

Access Attacks

Trust Exploitation Example: Below shows an example of trust exploitation.

Port Redirection Example: The example shows a threat actor using SSH (port 22) to connect to a compromised Host A trusted by Host B. Hence, the threat actor can use Telnet (port 23) to access it.

---

## Slide 28

OFFICIAL

Access Attacks

Man-in-the-Middle Attack Example: The figure displays an example of a man-in-the-middle attack.

Buffer Overflow Attack: The figure shows that the threat actor is sending many packets to the victim in an attempt to overflow the
victim’s buffer.

---

## Slide 29

OFFICIAL

Social Engineering Attacks

Social Engineering is an access attack that attempts to manipulate individuals into performing actions or divulging into confidential information.
Some social engineering techniques are performed in-person or via the telephone or internet.

---

## Slide 30

OFFICIAL

Social Engineering Attacks

---

## Slide 31

OFFICIAL

Social Engineering Attacks

The Social Engineer Toolkit (SET) was designed to help white hat hackers and other network security professionals to create social engineering attacks to test their own networks.
Enterprises must educate their users about the risks of social engineering, and develop strategies to validate identities over the phone, via email, or in person.

Social Engineering Protection Practices

---

## Slide 32

OFFICIAL

Strengthening the Weakest Link

Cybersecurity is as strong as its weakest link.
The weakest link in cybersecurity can be the personnel within an organization, and social engineering.
One of the most effective security measures that an organization can take is to train its personnel and create a ‘security-aware culture’.

---

## Slide 33

OFFICIAL

Network Attacks - Denial of Service, Buffer Overflows, and Evasion

---

## Slide 34

OFFICIAL

DoS and DDoS Attacks

DoS Attack:

DDoS Attack:

---

## Slide 35

OFFICIAL

DoS and DDoS Attacks

A Denial of Service (DoS) attack creates some sort of interruption in network services to users, devices, or applications. The two types of DoS attacks are as follows:
Overwhelming Quantity of Traffic - The threat actor sends an 	enormous quantity of data at a rate that the network, host, or 	application cannot handle.
Maliciously Formatted Packets - a maliciously formatted packet is sent to a host or application and the receiver is unable to handle it.

---

## Slide 36

OFFICIAL

Components of DDoS Attacks
The following terms are used to describe the components of a DDoS:

---

## Slide 37

OFFICIAL

Buffer Overflow (DOS) Attack

The threat actor uses the buffer overflow DoS attack to find a system memory-related flaw on a server and exploit it.
For instance, a remote denial of service attack vulnerability was discovered in Microsoft Windows 10, where the threat actor created malicious code to access out-of-scope memory.

---

## Slide 38

OFFICIAL

Buffer Overflow Attack

Another example is ping of death, where a threat actor sends a ping of death, which is an echo request in an IP packet that is larger than the maximum packet size.
The receiving host cannot handle a packet size and it would crash.
Note: It is estimated that one third of malicious attacks are the
result of buffer overflows.

---

## Slide 39

OFFICIAL

Evasion Methods
The evasion methods used by threat actors include:

---

## Slide 40

OFFICIAL

Evasion Methods

---

## Slide 41

OFFICIAL

Evasion Methods

---

## Slide 42

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

---

## Slide 43

OFFICIAL

What Did I Learn this session?

Malware is short for malicious software or malicious code.
Most viruses are spread through USB memory drives, CDs, DVDs, network shares, and email.
Trojans are found in online games.
Three common types of malware are virus, worm, and Trojan horse.
Threat actors can also attack the network from outside.
The three major categories are reconnaissance, access, and DoS attacks.
Recon attacks precede access or DoS attacks.

---

## Slide 44

OFFICIAL

What Did I Learn this Session?

Access attacks exploit known vulnerabilities in authentication services, FTP services, and web services.
DoS attacks create some sort of interruption of network services to users, devices, or applications.
DDoS attacks are similar in intent to DoS attacks, except that the DDoS attack increases in magnitude because it originates from multiple, coordinated sources.
Mirai is a malware that targets IoT devices configured with default login information.
The goal of a threat actor when using a buffer overflow DoS attack is to find a system memory-related flaw on a server and exploit it.

---

