---
title: OFFICIAL
---

# OFFICIAL

## Slide 1

OFFICIAL

Security Essentials VU23217

Week 11
1

1

---

## Slide 2

OFFICIAL

2

Week 11

In this session we will be investigating Data Integrity Controls,                       Slide
Hashing and Salting…………………….. 3
Digital Signatures ………………………. 9
Certificates…………………….……..….. 12
Database Integrity Enforcement.. 15

2

---

## Slide 3

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Data Integrity Controls

3

3

---

## Slide 4

OFFICIAL

Hashing Algorithms

Hashing is a tool that ensures data integrity

A cryptographic hash function (algorithm) has the following properties:
The input can be any length.
The output has a fixed length.
The hash function is one way and is not reversible.
Two different input values will always result in different hash values.
Hashing is a one-way mathematical function that is relatively easy to compute, but significantly harder to reverse. Grinding coffee beans is a good analogy of a one-way function. It is easy to grind coffee beans, but it is almost impossible to put all of the tiny pieces back together to rebuild the original beans.

4

---

## Slide 5

OFFICIAL

Hashing Algorithms

The difference between hashing and encryption is in how the data is stored. 
Encrypted text
the data can be decrypted with a decryption key.
Hash function
The encrypted data is stored along with its hash function.  The integrity and identity of the decrypted plaintext can be established by rehashing the plaintext and comparing its hash value against the stored hash value. 

The Hash is computed “before” and “after” data transfer or storage and data integrity is ensured if the hash value remains unchanged.

5

---

## Slide 6

OFFICIAL

Hashing Algorithms

There are many modern hashing algorithms widely used today. Two of the most popular are MD5 and SHA.
Message Digest 5 (MD5) Algorithm - is a hash algorithm developed by Ron Rivest that produces a 128-bit hash value.
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) – was developed by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and can be implemented in different strengths:
SHA-224 (224 bit)
SHA-256 (256 bit)
SHA-384 (384 bit)
SHA-512 (512 bit)

6

---

## Slide 7

OFFICIAL

Salting

Salting is used to make hashing more secure. If two users have the same password, they will also have the same password hashes. A salt, which is a random string of characters, is an additional input to the password before hashing.
This creates a different hash result for the two passwords as shown in the figure. A database stores both the hash and the salt.

7

---

## Slide 8

OFFICIAL

Hash-based  Message Authentication Code  (HMAC)

HMACs strengthens hashing algorithms by using an additional secret key as input to the hash function.
The use of HMAC goes a step further than just integrity assurance by adding authentication.
An HMAC uses a specific algorithm that combines a cryptographic hash function with a secret key, as shown in the figure.

8

---

## Slide 9

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Digital Signatures

9

9

---

## Slide 10

OFFICIAL

Signatures and the Law

Digital signatures provide the same functionality as handwritten signatures for electronic documents.
A digital signature is used to determine 	if someone has edited a document after the user signs it.
A digital signature is a mathematical method used to check the authenticity and integrity of a message, digital document, or software.
In many countries, digital signatures 	have the same legal importance as a 	manually signed document.
Digital signatures provide repudiation.

10

The act of a signer denying any affiliation with the signed material is known as repudiation.

---

## Slide 11

OFFICIAL

How Digital Signature Technology Works

Asymmetric cryptography is the basis for digital signatures. A public key algorithm like RSA generates two keys: one private and the other public. The keys are mathematically related.

11

---

## Slide 12

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Certificates

12

12

---

## Slide 13

OFFICIAL

The Basics of Digital Certicates

A digital certificate is equivalent to an electronic passport.
Digital certificates enable users, hosts, and organizations to exchange information securely over the Internet.
A digital certificate authenticates and verifies that users sending a message are who they claim to be.
Digital certificates can also provide confidentiality for the receiver with the means to encrypt a reply.

13

---

## Slide 14

OFFICIAL

Constructing a Digital Certificate

Digital certificate must follow a standard structure so that any entity can read and understand it regardless of the issuer.
X.509 is the standard for construction of digital certificates and the public key infrastructure (PKI) used to manage digital certificates
PKI is the policies, roles, and procedures required to create, manage, distribute, use, store, and revoke digital certificates.

14

---

## Slide 15

OFFICIAL

© 2021 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential

Database Integrity Enforcement

15

15

---

## Slide 16

OFFICIAL

Database Integrity

Databases Management Systems (DBMS) is an application that provides an efficient way to store, retrieve, and analyze large amounts of data. I.e. Structured data.
As data collection increases and data becomes more sensitive, it is important for cybersecurity professionals to protect the growing number of databases.
Database integrity refers to the accuracy, consistency, and reliability of data stored in a database.

16

Attackers can and do exploit any weaknesses in enforcing database integrity rules to either corrupt, disable or steal data from the databases.

---

## Slide 17

OFFICIAL

Database Integrity Requirements

Maintaining proper filing is critical in maintaining the trustworthiness and usefulness of the data within the database.
Tables (entities), records (rows), fields (columns), and data within each field make up a database along with the relationships between the tables.
In order to maintain the integrity of the relational database tables, database developers must follow entity normalization rules.

17

These normalization rules are to ensure the table structure and the relationships between them do not allow for ambiguous outcomes (anomalies) when storing and later selecting data.

---

## Slide 18

OFFICIAL

Database Integrity

The four database integrity rules or constraints are as follows:
Entity Integrity: All rows must have a unique identifier called a Primary Key.
Domain Integrity: All data stored in a column must follow the same format and definition.
Referential Integrity: Table relationships must remain consistent. Therefore, a user cannot delete a record which has other records related to first one. So, a customer record can’t be deleted before deleting all related (1:Many) transaction records belonging to that customer.

18

---

## Slide 19

OFFICIAL

Database Integrity

User-defined Integrity: A set of rules defined by a user which does not belong to one of the other categories. For example, a customer places a new order. The user first checks to see if this is a new customer. This is usually done by first checking if there is an existing Customer record with the same name, address or phone number or Date of Birth (DoB).If no existing customer record exists, then the user adds the new customer to the Customers table.

19

---

## Slide 20

OFFICIAL

Database Integrity

1. Entity Integrity:

20

Entity integrity requires a unique identifier for every record (or row) of a database table. This is defined as the Primary Key (PK) field (table column name) for that table.
Each Primary Key field must be unique for each record. That is, two different records can NOT have the same Primary Key value.
The PK must not be NULL. Null means using a deliberately missing or empty value.

For example, for a table of Students, the Last Name field might not be unique as more than one student might have the same last name. So, not used as a PKA Primary Key can be a composite field of two or more record fields with the two fields together forming a unique identifier. The First Name & Last Name fields would not be suitable as while unlikely, there may two students with the same first and last name at some time during the life of the database. But often organisations might use First Name + Last Name + DoB as an alternate PK.Most common PKs uses an autonumber value.For each new record generated, the database will assign a new autonumber value to a new record. The database will NEVER use a particular autonumber twice, even from a deleted record. 
So, for the Student table the PK would be the StudentID. 
Very often these autonumbers may start (or end) with special numbers or letters such as the Year+autonumber. The overall number of characters of the PK field is often enforced.

---

## Slide 21

OFFICIAL

2. Domain Integrity Requirements

2. Domain integrity ensures all data items in a column fall within a defined set of valid values. Each column in a table has a defined set of values, such as the set of all numbers for credit card numbers, social security numbers, or email addresses.
Limiting values assigned to an instance of that column enforces domain integrity – which can be as simple as choosing the correct data type, length and or format for a column.

21

---

## Slide 22

OFFICIAL

3. Referential Integrity

Another important integrity check is referential integrity which deals with foreign keys. A foreign key in “many” relationship side table must reference a primary key in the corresponding “one” table. I.e. You can not purchase PartID = 0199999 in the Customers table if there is no record for the corresponding PartID value in  the Inventory table.

22

---

## Slide 23

OFFICIAL

4. User Defined Integrity

Data validation rules check that new inputted data falls within the parameters defined by the database designer. Data validation rules helps to ensure the completeness, accuracy and consistency of data. The criteria used in a validation rule include:
Size – checks the number and type of characters in a data field.
Data Type & Format (input mask) – checks that the data conforms to a specified format. E.g. decimal numbers or character string
Consistency – checks for the consistency of codes in related data items
Range – checks that data lies within a defined min and maximum value
Check digit – provides for an extra calculation to generate a check digit for error detection.

23

---

## Slide 24

OFFICIAL

Chapter Summary

24

---

## Slide 25

OFFICIAL

In this chapter we presented the art of integrity which is used to ensure that data remains unchanged by anyone or anything over its entire life cycle.
The chapter introduced types of data integrity controls including:
hashing algorithms
password salting
keyed-hash message authentication code (HMAC)
These tools provide a way for cybersecurity specialists to verify the authenticity of messages and documents.
The chapter concluded with a discussion of database integrity enforcement.
Having a well-controlled and well-defined data integrity system increases the stability, performance, and maintainability of a database system.

Summary

25

---

