---
title: C I AVU21990
---

# C I AVU21990

## Slide 1

C I AVU21990

1

---

## Slide 2

2

---

## Slide 3

3

CIA Triad

Confidentiality prevents the disclosure of information to unauthorized people, resources, or processes. 
Integrity refers to the accuracy, consistency, and trustworthiness of data. 
Availability ensures that information is accessible by authorized users when needed.

---

## Slide 4

4

States of data

The second dimension of the Cybersecurity Cube focuses on the problems of protecting all of the states of data in cyberspace. Data has three possible states:
Data in transit 
Data at rest or in storage
Data in process
Examples??

---

## Slide 5

5

Countermeasures

Technology : technologies, devices, and products available to protect information systems and fend off cyber criminals.
Policies and Practice : build a strong defence by establishing policies, procedures, and guidelines that enable the users to stay safe and follow good practices. 
Education/training :  users must strive to become more knowledgeable about the threats of the cyberspace and establish a culture of learning and awareness.

---

## Slide 6

6

Confidentiality

There are three types of sensitive information:
Personal information is personally identifiable information (PII
Business information is information that includes anything that poses a risk to the organization if discovered by the public or a competitor. 
Classified information is information belonging to a government body classified by its level of sensitivity.

---

## Slide 7

7

Confidentiality

Methods used to ensure confidentiality include :
data encryption 
authentication
access control

---

## Slide 8

8

Confidentiality vs Privacy

Access to confidential information occurs after confirming proper authorization. Financial institutions, hospitals, medical professionals, law firms, and businesses handle confidential information. Maintaining confidentiality is more of an ethical duty.

---

## Slide 9

9

Confidentiality vs Privacy

Privacy is the appropriate use of data. When organizations collect information provided by customers or employees, they should only use that data for its intended purpose. Most organizations will require the customer or employee to sign a release form giving the organization permission to use the data.

---

## Slide 10

10

Confidentiality vs Privacy

Privacy is the appropriate use of data. When organizations collect information provided by customers or employees, they should only use that data for its intended purpose. Most organizations will require the customer or employee to sign a release form giving the organization permission to use the data.

---

## Slide 11

11

---

## Slide 12

12

Access Control - AAA

Access control refers to the protection schemes that prevent unauthorized access to a computer, network, database, or other data resources. 
The concepts of AAA involve three security services: Authentication, Authorization and Accounting.

---

## Slide 13

13

Authentication

Users are required to identify themselves:
Something you know
Something you have
Something you are

---

## Slide 14

14

---

## Slide 15

15

Authorization

Once a user has logged in (ie. been authenticated), authorization services determine which resources users can access and what operations they can perform.

---

## Slide 16

16

Accounting

Accounting keeps track of what users do, including what they access, the amount of time they access resources, and any changes made.
Secpol.msc
A Windows admin can set up policies to enable system auditing

---

## Slide 17

17

Accounting

---

## Slide 18

18

Integrity

Integrity is the accuracy, consistency, and trustworthiness of data during its entire life cycle. 
Data undergoes a number of operations such as capture, storage, retrieval, update, and transfer. Data must remain unaltered during all of these operations by unauthorized entities.

---

## Slide 19

19

Integrity

Methods used to ensure data integrity include:
 hashing
 data validation checks
 data consistency checks
 access controls.

---

## Slide 20

20

Integrity Checks

---

## Slide 21

21

Integrity

Version control  can prevent accidental changes by authorized users. Two users cannot update the same object. Objects can be files, database records, or transactions. For example, the first user to open a document has the permission to change that document; the second person has a read-only version.

---

## Slide 22

22

Integrity

Accurate backups help to maintain data integrity if data becomes corrupted. An organization needs to verify its backup process to ensure the integrity of the backup before data loss occurs.

---

## Slide 23

23

Integrity

Authorization determines who has access to an organization’s resources based on their need to know. File permissions and user access controls ensure that only certain users can modify data. An administrator can set permissions for a file to read-only. As a result, a user accessing that file cannot make any changes.

---

## Slide 24

24

Availability

Availability : the need to maintain availability of information systems and services at all times.  Cyberattacks and system failures can prevent prevent legitimate users from accessing and using information systems when needed.

---

## Slide 25

25

Availability

Methods used to ensure availability include :
system redundancy
 system backups
increased system resiliency
equipment maintenance
up-to-date operating systems and software
plans in place to recover quickly from unforeseen disasters.

---

## Slide 26

26

Five nines

High availability systems include 3 design principles:
Eliminate single points of failure (e.g. hot standbys
Provide for reliable crossover (e.g. redundant power supplies and comms)
Detect failures as they occur (active monitoring of system and device failures)

---

## Slide 27

27

Ensuring Availability

High availability systems include 3 design principles:
Eliminate single points of failure (e.g. hot standbys
Provide for reliable crossover (e.g. redundant power supplies and comms)
Detect failures as they occur (active monitoring of system and device failures)

---

## Slide 28

28

Ensuring Availability

---

## Slide 29

29

States of Data

Data in transit 
Data at rest or in storage
Data in process

---

## Slide 30

30

Data storage

A storage device can be local (on a computing device) or centralized (on the network).  Examples include:
Direct-attached storage (DAS) is storage connected to a computer. (e.g. hard drive or USB flash drive )
RAID
NAS
SAN
Cloud

---

## Slide 31

31

Data storage

Direct-attached storage (DAS) can be one of the most difficult types of storage to manage and control 
Vulnerable to attacks on local host
May include backup data

** should not store critical data on DAS

---

## Slide 32

32

Data storage

Network storage systems offer a more secure option. Network storage systems including RAID, SAN and NAS provide greater performance and redundancy. However, network storage systems are more complicated to configure and manage. They also handle more data, posing a greater risk to the organization if the device fails.

---

## Slide 33

33

Data in Transit

Sneaker net – uses removable media to physically move data from one computer to another
Wired networks – uses cables to transmit data
Wireless networks – uses radio waves to transmit data

---

## Slide 34

34

Data in Transit

Sneaker net – uses removable media to physically move data from one computer to another
Wired networks – uses cables to transmit data
Wireless networks – uses radio waves to transmit data

---

## Slide 35

35

Data in Transit

The protection of transmitted data is one of the most challenging jobs of a cybersecurity professional.

CIA

---

## Slide 36

36

Data in Transit

Countermeasures to attacks on data in-transit:
VPNs
SSL
IPsec
Encryption/Decryption
Hashing
Redundancy
Hot Standby
MFA

---

## Slide 37

37

Data in Process

The third state of data is data in process. This refers to data during :
initial input
modification
computation
output.

---

## Slide 38

38

Data in Process

Methods to collect data include manual data entry, scanning forms, file uploads, and data collected from sensors. Each of these methods pose potential threats to data integrity. 
Data corruption during the input process includes data entry errors or disconnected, malfunctioning, or inoperable system sensors, mislabelling and incorrect or mismatched data formats.

---

## Slide 39

39

Data in Process

Data modification refers to any changes to the original data  e.g. users manually modifying data, programs processing and changing data, and equipment failing resulting in data modification. Processes like encoding/decoding, compression/decompression and encryption/decryption are all examples of data modification. Malicious code also results in data corruption.

---

## Slide 40

40

Data in Process

Data output refers to outputting data to printers, electronic displays or directly to other devices. The accuracy of output data is critical because output provides information and influences decision-making. Examples of output data corruption include :
incorrect use of data delimiters
incorrect communication configurations
improperly configured printers

---

## Slide 41

41

Countermeasures

Technology (software/hardware/network/cloud)
Education/training
Policies/procedures

---

## Slide 42

42

Technologies

Software countermeasures include:
Software firewalls
Network/port scanners
Protocol analyzers/signature analyzers
Vulnerability scanners
Host based intrusion detection systems IDS

---

## Slide 43

43

Technologies

Hardware countermeasures include:
Firewall appliances
IDS
IPS
Content filtering

---

## Slide 44

44

Technologies

Network technology countermeasures include:
VPN
Network access control (NAC)
Wireless access point (WAP) security (eg authentication and encryption)

---

## Slide 45

45

Technologies

Cloud based technologies shift the technology from the organisation to the cloud provider.
3 main cloud computing services:
SaaS
IaaS
PaaS
Cloud service providers use virtual security appliances that run inside a virtual environment with a pre-packaged, hardened operating system running on virtualized hardware

---

## Slide 46

46

People -Training/education

Formal training program:
Make security awareness training a part of the employee’s onboarding process
Tie security awareness to job requirements or performance evaluations
Conduct in-person training sessions
Complete online courses
Security awareness should be an ongoing process since new threats and techniques are always on the horizon.

---

## Slide 47

People - Zero Trust

47

Vetting of new employees:Employees have authorized access to the network and sensitive data. To ensure this trust is well placed, through vetting is mandatory. (checking their identity is genuine, police clearances, financial stability and some invasive procedures such as checking their social media for hacktivism or threatening extreme views)

User Account Behaviour Monitoring: Sounds a bit Orwellian, but a person’s network activity should match their job role/requirements. So, activities are logged and trendlines of the user’s usual behaviour are developed so any anomalies or suspicious activities can be flagged.

Adequate supervision is exercised:Every employee should be reporting to someone and that someone has the duty to ensure their subordinates are supervised.

---

## Slide 48

48

Culture of Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity awareness culture is an ongoing effort that requires the leadership of upper management and the commitment of all users and employees. 
Starts with the establishment of policies and procedures by management. E.g.  cybersecurity awareness days, banners and signage to increase overall cybersecurity awareness. The creation of cybersecurity orientation workshops and seminars help to increase awareness.

---

## Slide 49

49

Policies

A security policy is a set of security objectives for a company that includes rules of behaviour for users and administrators and specifies system requirements.

Create a cyber security policy | business.gov.au

---

## Slide 50

50

Policies

A comprehensive security policy accomplishes several tasks:
demonstrates an organization’s commitment to security.
sets the rules for expected behavior.
ensures consistency in system operations, software and hardware acquisition and use, and maintenance.
defines the legal consequences of violations.
gives security staff the backing of management.

---

## Slide 51

51

Standards

Standards help an IT staff maintain consistency in operating the network. 
Standards document the technologies that specific users or programs need in addition to any program requirements or criteria that an organization must follow. 
This helps IT staff improve efficiency and simplicity in design, maintenance, and troubleshooting.

---

## Slide 52

52

Guidelines

Guidelines are a list of suggestions on how to do things more efficiently and securely. They are similar to standards, but are more flexible and are not usually mandatory. Guidelines define how standards are developed and guarantee adherence to general security policies.

---

## Slide 53

53

Procedures

Procedure documents are longer and more detailed than standards and guidelines. 
Procedure documents usually contain step-by-step instructions and graphics.

---

