---
title: Security Essentials VU23217
---

# Security Essentials VU23217

## Slide 1

Security Essentials VU23217

Week 13

1

---

## Slide 2

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	2

OFFICIAL

Week 13

In this session we will be investigating the following:
The NIST framework
Incident response
Using the NIST framework
The Essential 8

2

---

## Slide 3

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	3

OFFICIAL

1. Overview of NIST Framework 2.0NIST CSF (1.1) first released in 2014NIST CSF 2.0 released in late Feb 2024

3

---

## Slide 4

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	3

OFFICIAL

4

---

## Slide 5

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	4

OFFICIAL

The NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0 (NIST CSF) provides guidance on how to manage and reduce IT infrastructure security risk.
The CSF is made up of standards, guidelines and practices that can be used to prevent, detect and respond to cyberattacks.
Individual organizations or companies use the NIST CSF to produce a customised, unique IT Security Management, made up of an action program of IT Security policies and procedures

What is the NIST Framework 2.0?

5

---

## Slide 6

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	5

OFFICIAL

The aim of the framework is to ensure critical IT infrastructure is secure.
Unlike the ISO 27001 framework which requires formal certification, the NIST's framework is intended to provide guidance but is not compliance-focused.
The goal is to encourage organizations to make addressing cybersecurity risks a priority -- similar to financial, industrial/personnel safety and operational risks.

NIST Framework Objectives

6

---

## Slide 7

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	6

OFFICIAL

7

---

## Slide 8

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	7

OFFICIAL

The framework can be used to increase security in the following ways:
to determine current levels of implemented cybersecurity measures by 	creating a profile;
to identify new potential cybersecurity standards and policies;
to communicate new requirements; and
to create a new cybersecurity program and requirements.

Uses of the NIST Framework

8

---

## Slide 9

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	8

OFFICIAL

Originally, the NIST Cybersecurity Framework was designed to be used as a guideline.
The framework is meant to be both voluntary and performance-based, meaning that organizations are not obliged to follow it.

NIST Compliance

9

---

## Slide 10

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	9

OFFICIAL

The CSF framework can be broken down into three parts: the core, implementation and profile.

Three Parts of the Framework

10

---

## Slide 11

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	10

OFFICIAL

The framework core, as described by NIST, is the set of cybersecurity activities and desired outcomes and will vary by organization and use case, as will the individual responsible for those actions. Additionally, the order and size of Functions, Categories, and Subcategories in the Core does not imply the sequence or importance of achieving them. The structure of the Core is intended to resonate most with those charged with operationalizing risk management within an organization.

Framework Core

11

---

## Slide 12

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	11

OFFICIAL

Govern (GV), The organization’s cybersecurity risk management strategy, expectations and policy are established, communicated and monitored.
Identify, which refers to developing an understanding of how to manage 	cybersecurity risks to systems, assets, data or other sources.
Protect, which refers to the safeguards put in place that ensure critical 	infrastructure services are delivered.
Detect, which defines how a cybersecurity event is identified.
Respond, which defines what actions are taken when a cybersecurity 	event is detected.
Recover, which identifies what services should focus on resilience, as 	well as outlines restore capabilities of impaired services.

Five Core Functions

12

---

## Slide 13

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	12

OFFICIAL

Application of the Framework

13

---

## Slide 14

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	13

OFFICIAL

2. NIST Incident Response

14

---

## Slide 15

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	14

OFFICIAL

Establishing an Incident Response Capability

Incident response aims to limit the impact of 	the attack, assess the damage caused, and 	implement recovery procedures.
Incident Response involves the methods, 	policies, and procedures that are used by an 	organization to respond to a cyber attack.

15

---

## Slide 16

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	15

OFFICIAL

Overall Incident Response

The overall incident response actions are shown below

16

---

## Slide 17

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	16

OFFICIAL

Establishing an Incident Response Capability

The below table summarizes the policy, plan and procedure elements in an incident response:

17

---

## Slide 18

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	17

OFFICIAL

Incident Response Stakeholders

The stakeholders involved in handing a security incident are as follows:
Management
Information Assurance
IT Support
Legal Department
Public Affairs and Media Relations
Human Resources
Business Continuity Planners
Physical Security and Facilities Management

18

---

## Slide 19

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	18

OFFICIAL

Incident Response Stakeholders

The Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification (CMMC)
The CMMC certifies organizations by level. For most 	domains, there are five levels, however for incident 	response, there are only four:
Level 2 - Establish an incident response plan that follows the NIST process.
Level 3 - Document and report incidents to stakeholders identified in the incident response plan.
Level 4 - Use knowledge of attacker TTP to refine
incident response planning and execution.
Level 5 - Utilize accepted and systematic computer forensic data gathering techniques.

19

---

## Slide 20

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	19

OFFICIAL

NIST Incident Response Life Cycle

NIST defines four steps in the incident response process life cycle:
Preparation - The members of the CSIRT are trained in how to respond to an incident.
Detection and Analysis – CSIRT quickly identifies, analyzes, and validates an incident.
Containment, Eradication, and Recovery – CSIRT implements procedures to contain the threat, eradicate the impact on organizational assets, and use backups to restore data and software.
Post-Incident Activities – CSIRT documents how the incident was handled, recommends changes for future response, and specifies how to avoid a reoccurrence.

20

---

## Slide 21

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	20

OFFICIAL

Preparation

The preparation phase is when the CSIRT is created and trained. The tools and assets that 	will be needed by the team to investigate incidents are acquired and deployed.
The examples of actions in the preparation phase are as follows:
Facilities to host the response team and the SOC are created.
Risk assessments are used to implement controls that will limit the number of incidents.
User security awareness training materials are developed.
Necessary hardware and software for incident analysis and mitigation is acquired.

21

---

## Slide 22

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	21

OFFICIAL

Detection and Analysis

Different types of incidents will require different responses.
Attack Vectors: Web, Email, Loss or Theft, Impersonation, Attrition and Media.
Detection: Automated detection - Antivirus software, IDS, manual detection - user reports.
Analysis: Use Network and System Profiling to determine the validity of security incidents.
Scoping: Provide information on the containment of the incident and deeper analysis of the effects of the incident.
Incident Notification: Notify appropriate stakeholders and outside parties, once the incident is analyzed and prioritized,

22

---

## Slide 23

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	22

OFFICIAL

Containment, Eradication, and Recovery

After determining the validity of the incident through detection and analysis, it must be 	contained.
Containment Strategy: For every type of incident, a containment strategy should be created and enforced depending on some conditions.
Evidence: During an incident, evidence must be gathered to resolve it. It is required for subsequent investigation by authorities.
Attacker Identification: Identifying attackers will minimize the impact on critical business assets and services.
Eradication, recovery, and remediation: to eradicate, identify all hosts that need remediation; to recover hosts, use clean and recent backups, or rebuild them with installation media.

23

---

## Slide 24

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	23

OFFICIAL

Post-Incident Activities

It is important to periodically meet with all the parties involved to discuss the events that took
place and the actions of all of the individuals while handling the incident.
Lessons-based hardening:
The organization should hold a “lessons learned” meeting to:
Review the effectiveness of the incident handling process.
Identify necessary hardening needed for existing security controls and practices.

24

---

## Slide 25

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	24

OFFICIAL

Incident Data Collection and Retention

The below table summarizes the incident data collection and retention:

25

---

## Slide 26

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	25

OFFICIAL

Reporting Requirements and Information Sharing

Governmental regulations should be consulted by the legal team to determine the 	organization’s responsibility for reporting the incident.
Management needs to determine what additional communication is necessary with other 	stakeholders, such as customers, vendors, partners and so on.
NIST recommends that an organization coordinate with organizations to share details for the
incident. The critical recommendations from NIST for sharing information are as follows:
Plan incident coordination with external parties before incidents occur.
Consult with the legal department before initiating any coordination efforts.
Perform incident information sharing throughout the incident response life cycle.
Attempt to automate as much of the information sharing process as possible.
Balance the benefits of information sharing with the drawbacks of sharing sensitive information.

26

---

## Slide 27

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	26

OFFICIAL

Essential Eight

27

---

## Slide 28

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	27

OFFICIAL

This is an initiative of the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC)
Itself, a division of the Australian Signals Directorate
The ACSC monitors threats 24 / 7
Provides advice and information on cyber protection to individuals 	and businesses.

ACSC – Essential Eight

28

---

## Slide 29

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	28

OFFICIAL

While no set of mitigation strategies are guaranteed to protect against all cyber threats, organisations are recommended to implement eight essential mitigation strategies from the ACSC’s Strategies to Mitigate Cyber Security Incidents as a baseline.
This baseline, known as the Essential Eight, makes it much harder for adversaries to compromise systems.

Essential Eight

29

---

## Slide 30

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	29

OFFICIAL

The essential Eight are prioritised Strategies to Mitigate Cyber Security Incidents.
The purpose is to help organisations protect themselves against various cyber threats.

Introduction to the Essential Eight

30

---

## Slide 31

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	30

OFFICIAL

The Essential Eight has been designed to protect Microsoft Windows-based internet-connected networks.
The principles behind Essential Eight can apply to cloud services and enterprise mobility, or other operating systems – but other strategies may be more appropriate.

Introduction to the Essential Eight

31

---

## Slide 32

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	31

OFFICIAL

The Essential Eight has four maturity levels 0, 1, 2, 3
Organisations should identify and plan for a target maturity level suitable for their environment.

Implementing Essential Eight

See over page

32

---

## Slide 33

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	32

OFFICIAL

33

---

## Slide 34

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	33

OFFICIAL

What Are The Essential 8?

34

---

## Slide 35

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	34

OFFICIAL

Once target maturity level has been identified, organisations should then progressively implement each maturity level until that target is achieved.

Implementing Essential Eight

35

---

## Slide 36

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	35

OFFICIAL

The ACSC recommends that when deciding how to implement the controls organisations should consider the threat that concerns them most.
We will look at two common ones here:
Targeted cyber intrusion
Ransomware

Which Controls – How to Implement?

36

---

## Slide 37

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	36

OFFICIAL

When an organisation is targeted due to the sector they operate in, the IP they hold or the sensitivity of the information they work with, preventing malware delivery and execution while limiting the extent of any incident is a key strategy.
Implement Application Control to ensure only approved applications, scripts and binaries can execute on machines, reducing the chances of malware and macro attacks.

Targeted Cyber Intrusion

37

---

## Slide 38

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	37

OFFICIAL

Patching applications is key to limiting many targeted attacks that use known vulnerabilities, especially in commonly used third-party applications.
Adversaries know these applications exist on many machines but are not routinely updated or patched to the same cadence as Microsoft and other operating systems.

Targeted Cyber Intrusion

38

---

## Slide 39

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	38

OFFICIAL

Ransomware is a type of malware from cryptovirology that threatens to publish the victim's personal data or permanently block access to it unless a ransom is paid off.
The recent collapse of a local housing development company listed a cyber-attack as one of the key triggers behind their demise.

Ransomware

39

---

## Slide 40

© 2016 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco Confidential	39

OFFICIAL

Summary

40

---

